What to kn ow about ca nce r
Medically reviewed by Teresa Hagan Thomas PHD, BA, RN — Written by
Rachel Nall, MSN, CRNA — Updated on January 24, 2024
Cancer causes cells to divide uncontrollably. This can
result in tumors, damage to the immune system, and other
impairment that can be fatal.
Cancer can affect various parts of the body, such as the breasts, lungs,
prostate, and skin.
In this article, we examine types of cancer, how the disease develops, and
how doctors may treat it. We also explore different types of cancer and
disease outlook. Finally, we answer some common questions about
cancer.
Cancer resources
To discover more evidence-based information and resources for
cancer, visit our dedicated hub.
What is cancer? Causes Treatments Types Outlook FAQs
Takeaway
ADVERTISEMENT
What is cancer?
z
ADVERTISEMENT
SUBSCRIBE5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 1/9Photo edited by Stephen Kelly; Science Photo Library – STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/ CSA
Images/Getty Images
Cancer is a broad term. It describes the disease that results when
cellular changes cause the uncontrolled growth and division of cells.
Some types of cancer cause rapid cell growth, while others cause cells to
grow and divide at a slower rate.
Certain forms of cancer result in visible growths called tumors, while
others, such as leukemia, do not.
Most of the body’s cells have specific functions and fixed lifespans. Cell
death is part of a natural and beneficial phenomenon, which healthcare
professionals call apoptosis.
A cell receives instructions to die so that the body can replace it with a
newer cell that functions better. Cancerous cells lack the components that
instruct them to stop dividing and to die.
As a result, they build up in the body, using oxygen and nutrients that
would usually nourish other cells. Cancerous cells can form tumors, impair
the immune system and cause other changes that prevent the body from
functioning regularly.
Cancerous cells may appear in one area, then spread via the lymph
nodes. These are clusters of immune cells located throughout the body.
There are many causes of cancer, and some are preventable.
Risk factors
Preventable risk factors for cancer include:
smoking
z
Causes5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 2/9heavy alcohol consumption
excess body weight
physical inactivity
poor nutrition
human papillomavirus infection
Other risk factors for cancer are not preventable. Currently, the most
significant unpreventable risk factor is age. According to the American
Cancer Society (ACS), doctors in the United States diagnose 88% of
cancer cases in people ages 50 years or older.
Is cancer genetic?
Genetic factors can contribute to the development of cancer.
A person’s genetic code tells their cells when to divide and expire.
Changes in the genes can lead to faulty instructions, and cancer can
result.
Genes also influence the cells’ production of proteins, and proteins carry
many of the instructions for cellular growth and division.
Some genes change proteins that would usually repair damaged cells.
This can lead to a predisposition for cancer. If a parent has these genes,
they may pass on the altered instructions to their offspring. A doctor may
refer to this as an inherited gene mutation. These mutations may
contribute to the development of up to 10% of cancer cases.
Some genetic mutations that increase the risk of developing cancer occur
after birth. Healthcare professionals refer to these changes as “acquired
gene mutations”. Possible causes include smoking and sun exposure.
These genetic changes cause cancer more commonly than inherited
gene mutations.
Other changes that can result in cancer take place in the chemical signals
that determine how the cells turn specific genes on and off. Doctors may
call these “epigenetic changes”.
ADVERTISEMENT5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 3/9Doctors usually prescribe treatments based on the type of cancer, its
stage at diagnosis, and the person’s overall health.
Some examples of cancer treatment include:
Chemotherapy aims to kill cancerous cells with medications that
target rapidly dividing cells. The drugs can also help shrink tumors,
but the side effects can be severe.
Hormone therapy involves taking medications that change how
certain hormones work or interfere with the body’s ability to produce
them. When hormones play a significant role, as with prostate and
breast cancers, this is a common approach.
Immunotherapy uses medications and other treatments to boost the
immune system and encourage it to fight cancerous cells.
Radiation therapy uses high-dose radiation to kill cancerous cells.
Also, a doctor may recommend using radiation to shrink a tumor
before surgery or reduce tumor-related symptoms.
Stem cell transplant can be especially beneficial for people with
blood-related cancers, such as leukemia or lymphoma. It involves
removing cells, such as red or white blood cells, that chemotherapy
or radiation has destroyed. Lab technicians then strengthen the cells
and put them back into the body.
Surgery is often a part of a treatment plan when a person has a
cancerous tumor. Also, a surgeon may remove lymph nodes to
reduce or prevent the disease’s spread.
Targeted therapies perform functions within cancerous cells to
prevent them from multiplying. They can also boost the immune
system. Two examples of these therapies are small-molecule drugs
and monoclonal antibodies.
Doctors will often employ more than one type of treatment to maximize
effectiveness.Treatments
ADVERTISEMENT
5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 4/9The most common type of cancer in the U.S. is breast cancer, followed
by lung and prostate cancers, according to the National Cancer Institute,
which excluded nonmelanoma skin cancers from these findings.
Each year, more than 40,000 people in the country receive a diagnosis of
one of the following types of cancer:
bladder
colon and rectal
endometrial
kidney
leukemia
liver
melanoma
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
pancreatic
thyroid
Other forms are less common. According to the National Cancer Institute,
there are over 100 types of cancer.
Cancer development and cell division
Doctors classify cancer by its location in the body and the tissues that it
forms in.
For example, sarcomas develop in bones or soft tissues, while carcinomas
form in cells that cover internal or external surfaces in the body. Basal cell
carcinomas develop in the skin, while adenocarcinomas can form in the
glands.
When cancerous cells spread to other parts of the body, the medical term
for this is metastasis.
A person can also have more than one type of cancer at a time.
Improvements in cancer detection, increased awareness of the risks of
smoking, and a drop in tobacco use have all contributed to a year-on-year
decrease in the number of cancer diagnoses and deaths.
According to the ACS, the overall cancer death rate declined by 33%
between 1991 and 2020.Types
Outlook5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 5/9When a person has cancer, their outlook will depend on whether the
disease has spread and on its type, severity, and location.
Below are some common questions and answers about cancer.
How do I recognize cancer before it starts to cause serious
health problems?
Some cancers cause early symptoms, but others do not exhibit symptoms
until they are more advanced. Many of these symptoms are often from
causes unrelated to cancer.
The best way to identify cancer early is to report any unusual, persistent
symptoms to a doctor so they can offer advice about any further testing
that may be needed.
Can people with cancer live a long life?
Each individual’s outlook varies depending on the type of cancer they
have and other factors, such as their overall health and whether the
disease has spread.
However, the ACS indicates that the overall cancer death rate has
declined by 33% between 1991 and 2020.
How long can someone live with cancer without knowing?
Some types of cancer do not cause symptoms in the early stages.
Therefore, a person may not know they are living with the disease until it
reaches more advanced stages.
For example, research indicates that carcinoid tumors may not present
with any symptoms for years.ADVERTISEMENT
Frequently asked questions
Summary5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 6/9Cancer causes cells to divide uncontrollably. It also prevents them from
dying at the natural point in their life cycle.
Genetic factors and lifestyle choices, such as smoking, can contribute to
the development of the disease. Several elements affect the ways that
DNA communicates with cells and directs their division and death.
After nonmelanoma skin cancer, breast cancer is the most common type
in the U.S.
Treatments are constantly improving. Examples of current methods
include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery. Some people
benefit from newer options, such as stem cell transplantation and
precision medicine.
The diagnosis and death rates of cancer are dropping yearly.
 
Cancer / OncologyADVERTISEMENT
How we reviewed this article:
SOURCES
Share this article
v
RELATED COVERAGE
What to know about radiation
therapy?
Medically reviewed by Seunggu Han, M.D.5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 7/9Radiation therapy is a treatment for cancer. A person may receive it
alongside another treatment or alone. Find out why doctors recommend…
READ MORE
When are rashes a sign of cancer?
Medically reviewed by Owen Kramer, MD
A rash can indicate mild irritation, or it could be a sign of skin cancer. It is
important to find out the differences between cancerous and…
READ MORE
Can dogs detect cancer?
Medically reviewed by Vincent J. Tavella DVM, MPH
Dogs may be able to help medical professionals by detecting some types
of cancer through odor signatures in a person’s breath, urine, and skin.
READ MORE
Simple urine test may help detect
prostate cancer in early stages
Researchers have identified a new set of urine-based biomarkers that can
accurately detect both the presence and severity of prostate cancer as…
READ MORE
Treatment guide: Subcutaneous
PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibitor injections
for treating cancer5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 8/9vz
Keep up with the ever-changing world of medical science with new and
emerging developments in health.
Your privacy is important to us
About Us
Contact Us
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Privacy Settings
Advertising PolicyHealth Topics
Health Hubs
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
Your Privacy Choices
© 2025 Healthline Media UK Ltd, London, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the
registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health
Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a
substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before
consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.This treatment guide explains how subcutaneous PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibitor
injections treat certain types of cancer.
READ MORE
MNT Related Articles
Common types Stages Cancer symptoms in men
Hallmarks of cancer Prognosis Diet Types of radiation therapy
Common medications Leukeran Leukeran dosage
Xermelo side effects How fast does cancer spread?
VIEW ALL ARTICLES +
Get our newsletter
Enter your email SUBSCRIBE SUBSCRIBE5/16/25, 2:23 PM Cancer: Overview, causes, treatments, and types
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323648#what-is-cancer 9/9

IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
299 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACY AND CHEMISTRY  
 
Available online at www.ijrpc.com  
 
DIAGNOSIS OF CANCER  
Valivarthi Harika *, Kondi Vanitha , Yasam Harika,   
Jampani  Yamini  and Thotakonda  Sravani 
Department of Pharmaceutics, Vishnu Institute of Pharmaceutical  
Education and Research , Narsapur – 502 313, Hyderabad,  Telangana,  India . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Cancer Definition  
Cancer  is not just one disease,  but a large  gro
up of almost  100 diseases.  Its two main  chara
cteristics  are uncontrolled  growth  of thecells  in 
the human  body  and the ability  of these  cells t
o migratefrom  the original  site and spread  to di
stant  sites.  If the spread  is notcontrolled,  canc
er can result  in death . 
The major  risk factors  for cancer  are: tobacco,  
alcohol,  diet, sexual  and reproductive  behavior
, infectious  agents,  family  history , 
occupation , environment  and pollution.  
Cancer types can be grouped into broader 
categories. The main categories of cancer 
include:  
- Carcinoma  
Cancer  that begins in  the skin or in tissues that 
line or cover internal organs. There are a 
number of subtypes of carcinoma, 
including  adenocarcinoma , basal cell 
carcinoma ,squa mous cell carcinoma , 
and transitional cell  carcinoma.  
 
 
 - Sarcoma  
Cancer  that begins in bone, cartilage, fat, 
muscle, blood vessels, or o ther connective or 
supportive tissue.  
 
- Leukemia  
Cancer  that starts in blood -forming tissue such 
as the bone marrow and causes large 
numbers of abnormal blood cells to be 
produced and enter the blood.  
 
- lymphoma and myeloma  
Cancers  that begin in the cells of  the immune 
system . 
 
- central nervous system cancers   
Cancers  that begin in the tissues of the brain 
and spinal cord.  
 
METHODS  
Diagnos is 
Diagnosis  begins  with a thorough  Physicalexa
mination  and a complete  medical  history.  The 
doctor  will observe,  feel and palpate  (applypre
ssure  by touch)  different  parts  of the body  in orResearch Article  
ABSTRACT  
Malignant transformation of cells into c ancer arises due to long term accumulation of genetic and 
epigenetic  events. Early diagnosis of these transformations in cells can improve the prognosis of 
cancer cases. Cancer screening  and surveillance methods include immuno  histochemistry, in situ 
hybri dization (FISH), flow cytometry and  microarray are used nowadays for diagnosis. Microarray 
technology is a new and efficient approach to extract data of  biomedical relevance for a wide range of 
applications. In cancer research, it will provide high -throughput and valuable  insights into differences 
in an individual’s tumor as compared with constitutional DNA, mRNA expression, and protein  
expression and acti vity. This review highlights the recent developments in cancer diagnostic 
technologies and describes  the eventual use of these technologies for clinical and research 
applications.  
 
Keywords: Cancer, diagnosis, imaging, IHC, PCR, microarray, tumour marker . 
 IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
300 der to identify  any variations  from the normal  si
ze, feel, and textu re of the organ  or tissue.  
Different methods are u sed for the diagnosis 
of cancer those are  
 
Histological Methods  
These methods are based on microscopic 
examination of properly fixed tissues 
,supported with complete clinical and 
investigative data. These m ethods are most 
valuable in arri ving at the accurate diagnosis. 
These  diagnosis by either of these methods is 
made on the basis of that cytological features 
of benign tumours resemble those of normal 
tissues and that th ey are unable to invade and 
meta stasise,while malignant tumours are 
identified by lack of differentiation in cancer 
cell termed an aplasia ( a condition whereby 
cells lose the morphological characteristics of 
mature cells and their orientation with respect 
to each other and to endothelial cell s.)or 
cellular atypia (itis a pathologic term for a 
structural abnormality in a cell ) and may 
invade as well as metasta sis. 
 
Cytological Methods  
These methods for diagnosis consist of study 
of cells shed off into body cavities and study of 
cell by putting a  fine needle introduced under 
vacuum into the lesion(fine needle aspiration 
cytology FNAC).  
 
Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology  
Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology (FNAC) is a 
diagnostic procedure where a needle is 
inserted into your body, and a small amount of 
tissue is sucked out for examination under a 
microscope.  
It is a quicker and less painful procedure than 
a Biopsy,  but doctors still prefer a biopsy for 
lymphomas as it gives surer results.  
 
Application  
This type of sampling is p erformed for one of 
two reas ons 
1. A biopsy is performed on a lump or a 
tissue mass when its nature is in question.  
2. For known tumors, this biopsy is 
performed to assess the effect of treatment or 
to obtain tissue for special studies.  
When the lump can be felt, the biopsy is 
usually perf ormed by a  Cytopathologistic or a 
Surgeon . In this case, the procedure is usually 
short and simple. Otherwise, it may be 
performed by an interventional  radiologistic , a 
doctor with training in performing such 
biopsies under  X-ray or ultrasound guidance. In 
this case, the procedure may require more 
extensive preparation and take more time to 
perform.  Also, fine -needle aspiration is the main 
method used for  chorionic villus sampling  as 
well as for many types of  body fluid sampling , 
as shown in F ig 1and Fig 2. 
 
Histochemistry and Cytochemistry  
These are additional diagnosis tools which 
helps the pathologist in identifying the 
chemical composition of cell. Their constituents 
and their products by special staining 
methods.  
Though immunohistochemical techniques are 
more useful for tumourdiagnosis , 
histochemical  and cytochemical methods are 
still employed  for this purpose . 
 
Immunohistochemistry  
This is an immunological method of 
recognizing a cell by one or more of its specific 
components in the cytopla sm,cell membran e 
or nucleus . T hese cell components are 
combine with specific antibodies on the 
formaline fixed paraffinesection.the complex of 
antigen and antibody on the slide is made 
visible for light microscopic  identification by 
either fluorescent  dyes  or by enzyme s, as 
shown in Fig 3.  
The list of immunochemical stains is ever 
increasing;  one important group of such 
antibody stains is directed against various 
classes ofintermediate filaments which is 
useful in classification of poorly -differentiated 
tumours of e pithelial or mesenchymal origin. 
list of tumours and stains are shown in Table 
1. 
 
Electron Microscopy  
Ultra structural examination of tumour call 
offers selective role in diagnostic pathology  
1.Cell junctions -their presence and type.  
2.Cell surface eg: presen ce of microvilli.  
3. Cell shape and cytoplasmic extinction.  
4.Shape  of the nucleus and features of nuclear 
memberane.  
5. nucleoli -size and density.  
6.cytoplasmicorgenelles -their number is 
generally reduced.  
7. Dense bodies in the cytoplasm.  
8 any other sec retory products in the 
cytoplasam eg:melanosomesin melanoma and 
memberane bound granules in 
endocraintumours.  
 
Tumour Markers  
Tumor markers are substances that are 
produced by cancer or by other cells of the 
body in response to cancer or certain benign 
(noncancerous) conditions. Most tumor 
markers are made by normal cells as well as 
by cancer cells; however, they are produced at IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
301 much higher levels in cancerous conditions. 
These substances can be found in the blood, 
urine, stool, tumor tissue, or other tissue s or 
bodily fluids of some patients with cancer. 
Most tumor markers are proteins. However, 
more recently, patterns of  gene expression and 
changes to DNA have also begun to be used 
as tumor markers. Markers of the latter type 
are assessed in tumor tissue spe cifically.  
Thus far, more than 20 different tumor markers 
have been characterized and are in clinical 
use. Some are associated with only one type 
of cancer, whereas others are associated with 
two or more cancer types. There is no 
“universal” tumor marker t hat can detect any 
type of cancer.  
Tumor markers are used to help detect, 
diagnose, and manage some types of cancer. 
Although an elevated level of a tumor marker 
may suggest the presence of cancer, this 
alone is not enough to diagnose cancer. 
Therefore, me asurements of tumor markers 
are usually combined with other tests, such as  
biopsies,  to diagnose cancer.  
A doctor takes a sample of tumor tissue or 
bodily fluid and sends it to a laboratory, where 
various methods are used to measure the 
level of the tumor marker.  List of tumours 
markers for different cancers are listed in 
Table 2.  
 
Flow Cytometry  
In biotechnology , flow cytometry  is a  laser -
based, biophysical technology employed 
in cell counting , cell sorting , biomarkers 
 detect ion and  protein engineering , by 
suspending  cells in a stream of fluid and 
passing them by an electronic detection 
apparatus. It allows simultaneous  multipara 
metric  analysis  of the physical 
and chemical  characteristics of up to 
thousands of particles per second.  
Flow cytometry  is routinely used in the 
diagnosis of health disorders, especially  blood 
canc ers, but has many other applications in 
basic research, clinical practice and  clinical 
trials . A common variation is to physically sort 
particles based on their properties, so a s to 
purify populations of interest.  
Flow cytometry is a technology that is used to 
analyses  the physical and chemical 
characteristics of particles in a fluid as it 
passes through at least one laser. Cell 
components are fluoresc ently label ed and then 
excited by the laser to emit light at varying 
wavelengths.  
The fluorescence can then be measured to 
determine the amount and type of cells 
present in a sample. Up to thousands of 
particles per second can be analysed as they pass through the liquid stream. Which is shown 
in Fig  4 and Fig  5. 
Applications  
This laser -based technology is used to 
perform several procedures including:  
- Cell counting  
- Cell sorting  
- Detection of biomarkers  
- Protein engineering  
Flow cytometry has numerous applications in 
science, including tho se relevant to 
healthcare. The technology has been widely 
used in the diagnosis of health conditions, 
particularly diseases of the blood such 
as leukemia , although it is also commonly 
used in the various different fields of clinical 
practice as well as in basic research and 
clinical trials.  
Some examples of the fields this technology is 
used in include molecular biology, immunology , 
pathology, marine science and plant biology. 
In medicine, flow cytometry is a vital laboratory 
process used in transplantation, oncology, 
hematology,  genetics  and prena tal diagnosis. 
In marine biology, the abundance and 
distribution of photosynthetic plankton can be 
analysed. Size of particals is 1 -50micron size.  
Flow cytometry can also be used in the field of 
protein engineering, to help identify cell 
surface protein va riants.  
 This is a computerized technique by which the 
detailed characteristics  of individual tumour 
cell are recognized and quantified and the 
data can be stored for subsequent comparison 
too. 
 
In Situ Hybridization  
This is a molecular technique by which nucleic 
acid sequences can be localized by 
specifically labeled nucleic acid probe directly 
in the intact cell rather than by DNA extraction. 
It is shown in Fig 6.  
 
Molecular Diagnostic Technique:  
The group of molecular biologic methods in 
the tumour diagn ostic laboratory are a variety 
of DNA/RNA -based molecular technique in 
which the DNA/RNA are extracted from the 
cell and then analysed.the molecular methods 
in tumour diagnosis can be applied  in 
hematologic  as well as non -hematologic  
malignancies by  
- Analys is of molecular cytogenetic 
abnormalities.  
- Mutational analysis.  
- Antigen receptor gene rearrangement and  
- By study of the oncogenic viruses at 
molecular level.  
 
 IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
302 DNA Microarray Analysis of Tumours  
Currently, it is possible to perform molecular 
profiling of a  tumour by use of gene  chip 
technology which allows measurement  of 
level of expression of several thousand genes 
simultaneously.  
The core principle behind microarrays is 
hybridization between two DNA strands, the 
property of  complementary nucleic  acid 
sequences to specifically pair with each other 
by forming  hydrogen bonds  between 
complementary  nucleotide . A high number of 
complementary base pairs in a nucleotide 
sequence mean  tighter non-covalent  bonding 
between the two strands. After washing off 
non-specific bonding sequences, only strongly 
paired strands will remain hybridized. 
Fluorescently labeled target  sequences that bind to a probe sequence generate a signal 
that depends on the hybridization conditions 
(such as temperature ), and washing after 
hybridization. Total strength of the signal, from 
a spot (feature), depends upon the amount of 
target sample bi nding to the probes present on 
that spot. Microarrays use relative quantitation 
in which the intensity of a feature is compared 
to the intensity of the same feature under a 
different condition, and the identity of the 
feature is known by its position.  It is observed 
in Fig  7,8. 
DNA  microarray technology is a promising 
approach that allows both qualitative and 
quantitative screening for sequence variations 
in the genomic DNA of cancer cell. DNA 
microarray based samples.  
 
  
 
Fig. 1: FNAC method for taking  
of samples from tissues  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: FNAC method for taking of  
 samples from thyroid tissues  
 IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
303 
 
Fig. 3: Theformaline fixed paraffine section  
 
 
Fig. 4: Flow cytometry  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5: Graphical representation of different components d etected by using flow cyto metry  IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
304 
 
Fig. 6: Insitu hybridizations  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7: Hybridiza tion of the target to the probe  
 
 
 
 IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
305 
 
Fig. 8: The st eps requ ired in a microarray experiment  
 
 
 
Table 1:  List of stains  
Intermediate filaments  Tumour  
Keratin  Carcinomas,mesenchylomas,some germ cell tumours  
Vimentin  Sarcomas,melanomas,lymphoma  
Desmin  Myogenic tumours  
Neurofilaments  Neuraltumours  
Glial fi brillary acid protein(GFAP)  Glia tumours  
 
 
 
 
Table 2:  List of tumour markers  
Markers  Cancer  
Oncofoetal  antigen  
Alpha -foetalprotien(afa)  
 
Carcinoembryonicantigen(cea)  
CA19 -9 Hepatocellular carcinoma,non –seminomatousgerm cell tumour of testis.  
Cancer of bowel,pancreas,breast.  
Gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma,pancreatic tumor  
Cytoplasmic proteins  
Immunoglobulin  
Prostatespecific antigen  
Granules of melanin  
Actin  
Cytokeratin  
Factor III  
Glial fibrillaryprotien   
Multiple myeloma,othergammopathies  
Prostate carc inoma  
Melanoma  
Sarcoma  
Epithelial tumor  
Endothelial cell in vascular tumor  
Astrocytoma  
Enzymes  
Prostate acid phaosphatase  
Neuron specific enolase  
GalactosyltransferaseII   
Prostatic carcinoma  
Neuroblastoma,oat cell carcinoma lung  
Colon cancer,pancreatic ca ncer 
Hormones  
Human chorionic gonadotropin  
 
Calcitonin  
Catecholamines and vanillylmandelic acid  
Insulin probe uction  
Ectopic hormone production   
Trophoblastic tumours,nonseminomatous  germ cell tumours of testis  
Medullary carcinoma thyroid  
Neuroblastoma,p heochromocytoma  
Islet cell tumor  
Paraneoplastic syndromes  
Secreted cancer antigen  
CA-125 
CA-15-3  
Ovary  
Breast  
Serum and tissue protiens  β-2microglobulin,S -100 
Other biomolecules  Polyamines  
 
 
 
 
 
 IJRPC 2015, 5(2 ), 299-306                  Valivarthi Harika  et al .                        ISSN: 2231 2781  
 
306 REFERENCES  
1. Malati T. Tumour markers: an 
overview. Indian Journal of Clinical 
Biochemistry . 2007; 22(2): 17-31. 
2. Tumor Markers . 
http://www.patient.co .uk/doctor/Tu  
mour -Markers.htm.  
3. Perkins GL, Slater ED, Sanders GK  
and Prichard  JG. Serum tumor 
markers. American family physician . 
2003; 68(6):1075 -1088.  
4. Novaković S. Tumor markers in 
clinical oncology. Radiology and 
Oncology . 2004; 38(2). 
5. Harsh Mohan’s . Text book of 
pathology fifth edition fore word Ivan 
damjanoy. Basics of pathology.  
6. Mischel PS, Cloughesy T F and Nelson 
SF. DNA -microarray analysis of brain 
cancer: molecular classification for therapy. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience . 2004; 5(10):782-792 
7. Green ED , Guyer  MS. Institute  N. H. 
G. R. Charting a course for genomic 
medicine from base pairs to bedside.  
Nature . 2011; 470(7333): 204-213. 
8. Tang YW, Procop GW  and Persing 
DH. Molecular diagnostics of 
infectious diseases. Clinical Chemistry . 
1997; 43(11):2021 -2038.  
9. Netto GJ, Saad RD and Dysert  PA. 
Diagnostic molecular pathology: 
current techniques and clinical 
applications, part I. Proceedings 
(Baylor University. Medical 
Center) .2003; 16(4):379. 
10. Cobo F. Application of Molecular 
Diagnostic Techniques for Viral 
Testing . The open virology journal . 
2012;supp1( 6):104. 
 
 
 

