Diagnostic and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
Guidelines/ Thoracic  imaging
Intergroupe  francophone  de  cancérologie  thoracique,  Société  de
pneumologie
 de  langue  franc ¸  aise,  and  Société  d’imagerie  thoracique
statement
 paper  on  lung  cancer  screening
Sébastien  Courauda,b,∗,  Gilbert  Ferrettic,  Bernard  Milleronb,  Alexis  Cortotd,
Nicolas Girarde,  Valérie  Gounantf,  Franc ¸  ois  Laurentg,  Olivier  Leleuh,  Elisabeth  Quoixi,
Marie-Pierre Revelj,k, Marie Wislezk,l, Virginie Westeelm,  Gérard  Zalcmanf,k,
Arnaud
 Scherpereeld,  Antoine  Khalilk,n
aAcute  Respiratory  Disease  and  Thoracic  Oncology  Department,  Hôpital  Lyon  Sud,  Hospices  Civils  de  Lyon,  69310  Pierre-Bénite,  France
bIntergroupe  Francophone  de  Cancérologie  Thoracique,  75009  Paris,  France
cDepartment  of  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Radiology,  CHU  Grenoble  Alpes,  38700  La  Tronche,  France
dDepartment  of  Pneumology  and  Thoracic  Oncology,  CHU  Lille,  59000  Lille,  France
eDepartment  of  Thoracic  Oncology,  Institut  Curie,  75005  Paris,  France
fDepartment of  Thoracic  Oncology,  Groupe  Hospitalier  Bichat–Claude-Bernard,  Assistance  publique–Hôpitaux  de  Paris,  75018  Paris,  France
gDepartment  of  Radiology,  CHU  Bordeaux,  33000  Bordeaux,  France
hDepartment  of  Pneumology,  CH  Abbeville,  80100  Abbeville,  France
iDepartment  of  Pneumology,  CHRU  Strasbourg,  67200  Strasbourg,  France
jDepartment  of  Radiology,  Hôpital  Cochin,  Assistance  Publique–Hôpitaux  de  Paris,  75014  Paris,  France
kUniversité de  Paris,  F-75006  Paris,  France
lDepartment  of  Thoracic  Oncology,  Hôpital  Cochin,  Assistance  Publique–Hôpitaux  de  Paris,  75014  Paris,  France
mDepartment  of  Thoracic  Oncology,  CHU  de  Besanc ¸  on,  25000  Besanc ¸  on,  France
nDepartment  of  Radiology,  Groupe  Hospitalier  Bichat–Claude-Bernard,  Assistance  publique–Hôpitaux  de  Paris,  75018  Paris,  France
a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o
Keywords:
Lung
 neoplasm
Early
 detection  of  cancer
Multi-detector
 computed  tomography
Solitary
 pulmonary nodule
Multiple pulmonary  nodulesa  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
Following  the  American  National  Lung  Screening  Trial  results  in  2011  a  consortium  of  French  experts  met
to edit a statement. Recent results  of  other  randomized  trials  gave  the  opportunity  for  our  group  to  meet
again  in  order  to  edit  updated  guidelines.  After  literature  review,  we  provide  here  a  new  update  on  lung
cancer screening in France. Notably,  in  accordance  with  all  international  guidelines,  the  experts  renew
their  recommendation  in  favor  of  individual  screening  for  lung  cancer  in  France  as  per  the  conditions
laid out  in  this  document.  In  addition,  the  experts  recommend  the  very  rapid  organization  and  funding  of
prospective studies,  which,  if  conclusive,  will  enable  the  deployment  of  lung  cancer  screening  organized
at the  national  level.
©  2021  Published  by  Elsevier  Masson  SAS  on  behalf  of  Soci´et´e  franc ¸  aise  de  radiologie.
Abbreviation
18F-FDG18F-Fluoro-desoxy-glucose
ACRIN  American  College  of  Radiology  Imaging  Network
BTS  British  Thoracic  Society
CAD  computer-assisted  decision
CI  Conﬁdence  interval
∗Corresponding author  at:  Acute  Respiratory  Disease  and  Thoracic  Oncology
Department,
 Hôpital  Lyon  Sud,  Hospices  Civils  de  Lyon,  69310  Pierre-Bénite,  France.
E-mail address:  sebastien.couraud@chu-lyon.fr  (S.  Couraud).COPD Chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease
CT  Computed  tomography
CTDI  CT  dose  index
DANTE  Detection  And  screening  of  early  lung  cancer  with  Novel
imaging  TEchnology  and  molecular  assays
DEP  KP80  Dépistage  du  Cancer  du  Poumon  dans  la  Somme
DICOM  Digital  Imaging  and  Communications  in  Medicine
DLCST  Danish  Lung  Cancer  Screening  Trial
DLP  Dose-length  product;  ERS:  European  Respiratory  Society
ESR  European  Society  of  Radiology
GOLF  Groupe  d’oncologie  de  langue  franc ¸  aise
GGO  Ground-glass  opacity
HAS  Haute  Autorité  de  Santé
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diii.2021.01.012
2211-5684/© 2021  Published  by  Elsevier  Masson  SAS  on  behalf  of  Soci´et´e  franc ¸  aise  de  radiologie.S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
IFCT  Intergroupe  Francophone  de  Cancérologie  Thoracique
IRSN  Institut  de  Radioprotection  et  de  Sûreté  Nucléaire
JECS  Japanese  randomized  trial  for  evaluating  the  efﬁcacy  of
low-dose  thoracic  CT  Screening  for  lung  cancer  in  non-
smokers  and  smokers
LDCT  Low-dose  computed  tomography
LLPv2  Liverpool  Lung  Project  version  2
LungRADS  Lung  CT  Screening  Reporting  &  Data  System
MDT  Multidisciplinary  team
MILD  Multicentric  Italian  Lung  Detection
NCCN  National  Cancer  Centers  Network
NELSON  Nederlands–Leuvens  Longkanker  Screenings  Onderzoek
NLST  National  Lung  Screening  Trial
PET-CT  Positron  emission  tomography-computed  tomography
PLCOm2012  Prostate  Lung  Colon  Ovary  model  2012
PPV  Positive  predictive  value
PY  Pack-year
SFR  Société franc ¸ aise  de  radiologie
SIT  Société  d’imagerie  thoracique
SPLF Société de  pneumologie  de  langue  franc ¸  aise
UKLS  United  Kingdom  Lung  Screening
VDT Volume doubling  time
1. Introduction
Bronchopulmonary cancer  (lung  cancer  hereafter)  is  the  lead-
ing  cause  of  cancer  death  worldwide,  with  no  exception  for  France,
where  it  was  the  cause  of  around  33,000  deaths  in  2018  [1].  The
disease’s  incidence  has  stabilized  in  men  but  it  is  rising  rapidly
in  women  (+5.3%  per  year).  Lung  cancers  are  usually  detected  at
advanced  stages  (68%  of  newly-diagnosed  patients)  [2]  and  despite
current  advances  in  therapy,  the  pathology’s  ﬁve-year  survival  rate
in  those  stages  does  not  exceed  15%  [3,4] .  However,  when  diag-
nosed at  stage  I  and  with  surgical  resection  possible,  the  ten-year
survival  rate  of  lung  cancer  exceeds  80%  [5,6] .
Chest  X-ray,  sputum  cytology,  bronchoscopy  and
18F-Fluoro-desoxy-glucose  (18F-FDG)  positron  emission
tomography-computed  tomography  (PET-CT)  are  ineffective
for  lung  cancer  screening  [7–10] .  By  contrast,  low-dose  computed
tomography  (LDCT)  has  been  or  is  being  studied  in  ten  randomized
trials  [11]  (Fig.  1).  Among  them  however,  only  two  have  sufﬁciently
large  enrollments  to  detect  a  possible  difference  in  lung  cancer
mortality  with  sufﬁcient  statistical  power:  the  American  National
Lung  Screening  Trial  (NLST)  with  90%  power  to  detect  a  >  20%
difference  in  mortality,  and  the  Dutch-Belgian  NELSON  trial,  with
80%  power  to  detect  a  25%  difference  in  male  patients  [12,13] .
Following  the  positive  results  of  the  NLST  published  in  2011
[12],  a  French  multidisciplinary  group  of  specialists  with  members
from  the  Intergroupe  francophone  de  cancérologie  thoracique  (IFCT;
French  Cooperative  Thoracic  Intergroup),  the  Société  d’imagerie  tho-
racique  (SIT;  Thoracic  Imaging  Society)  representing  the  Société
franc ¸  aise  de  radiologie  (SFR;  French  Society  of  Radiology),  and  the
Groupe  d’oncologie  de  langue  franc ¸  aise  (GOLF;  Francophone  Oncol-
ogy  Group)  representing  the  Société  de  pneumologie  de  langue
franc ¸  aise  (SPLF;  Francophone  Pulmonology  Society)  had  made  a
number  of  propositions  for  individual  (i.e.,  physician-to-patient
recommendation)  lung  cancer  screening  [14,15] .  Six  years  later,
this  group  decided  to  update  the  previous  statement  following  the
communication  of  the  NELSON  trial  positive  results  [16].
2. Methods
A  national  group  of  experts  has  been  established  upon  a  call
for  expression  of  interest  by  IFCT,  SIT  and  GOLF;  as  well  as  all
experts who participated  in  the  initial  multidisciplinary  taskforce
were  also  systematically  reconvened  [14].  Upstream  of  the  newmeeting,  a  number  of  questions,  presented  as  section  headings
below,  were  isolated  and  distributed  to  pairs  of  experts  for  consid-
eration.  Those  expert  pairs  were  supplied  with  the  previous  texts
developed  for  the  preceding  recommendations  [15].  Thereafter,
all  the  contributors  were  gathered  for  a  workshop  held  7th–8th
November,  2018.  There,  the  expert  pairs  presented  their  proposi-
tions,  which  were  directly  discussed  and  corrected  until  obligatory
consensus  was  reached.  After  the  workshop,  the  rationales  of  cer-
tain  passages  were  reworked,  when  needed  and/or  in  the  presence
of  new  data,  by  the  expert  pairs.  The  ﬁnal  version  of  the  text  was
fully  approved  by  all  authors  then  all  contributors.  The  level  of  evi-
dence  of  the  group’s  recommendations  was  graded  as  per  the  scale
of  the  Haute  Autorité  de  Santé  (HAS;  French  National  Authority  for
Health)  (Table  1).
3.  Should  lung  cancer  screening  be  proposed  in  France?
In  2012,  the  group  of  experts  stated  its  support  for  individ-
ual lung cancer screening in  precise  settings  and  with  particular
eligibility criteria  based  on  the  results  of  the  NLST  [12,14] .  This
latter involved 53,454 high-risk patients  aged  55  to  74  years  with
a ≥  30  pack-year  (PY)  smoking  history  and  who  had  not  quit  smok-
ing more than 15 years  prior.  All  were  randomly  assigned  to  three
years of  yearly  screening  by  PA  chest  X-ray  or  LDCT  [12].  The  NLST’s
results showed a  signiﬁcant  20%  reduction  (95%  conﬁdence  inter-
val  [CI]:  6.8–26.7;  P  =  0.004)  in  lung  cancer-related  mortality  and
a 6.7% reduction  (95%  CI:  1.2–13.6;  P  =  0.020)  in  all-cause  mortal-
ity  in  the  patients  screened  by  LDCT,  compared  to  those  screened
by  chest  X-ray.  Results  from  other  trials  on  LDCT  screening  have
since  been  reported  (Fig.  1).  The  randomized  DLCST  trial  found
no  improvement  in  cancer-related  death  but  it  had  several  lim-
its  affecting  that  endpoint.  First,  the  trial  was  not  conceived  to
demonstrate  a  reduction  in  speciﬁc  mortality,  but  to  be  grouped
for  analysis  with  the  NELSON  trial,  an  aspect  that  explains  the  rela-
tively  modest  enrollment  for  DLCST.  Also,  it  reported  early  results,
with  a  median  follow-up  of  only  ﬁve  years  [17].  Similarly,  the  ten-
year  results  reported  from  the  ITALUNG  trial  were  also  negative
but  they  too  suffered  from  limited  statistical  power  [18].  Pooled
results from  the  Italian  DANTE  and  MILD  trials  after  a  median  eight
years  of  follow-up  were  published  in  2017  and  showed  no  signiﬁ-
cant  mortality  beneﬁt  for  LDCT  at  that  amount  of  surveillance  [19].
However,  the  authors  of  the  MILD  trial  recently  provided  a  new
report  on  their  results  at  ten  years  of  follow-up  for  their  cohort
[20].  Although  the  MILD  trial  was  not  designed  to  detect  a  differ-
ence  in  mortality  but  to  evaluate  annual  or  biennial  screening,  its
results  did  show  a  signiﬁcant  39%  reduction  in  lung  cancer-related
mortality  in  the  patients  who  had  LDCT  screening  (annual  and  bien-
nial  grouped)  compared  to  those  who  had  no  intervention.  Also
recently,  the  results  of  the  German  LUSI  trial  were  reported  with
a  median  follow-up  of  8.8  years.  Here  too,  the  study  cohort  was
too  small  to  ensure  sufﬁcient  power  for  the  detection  of  a  sig-
niﬁcant  difference  in  speciﬁc  mortality.  Nonetheless,  the  authors
did  report  a  26%  reduction  (0.74  [95%  CI:  0.46–1.19];  P  =  0.21)  in
cancer-related  mortality  for  patients  who  had  LDCT  screening  (vs.
X-ray).  Furthermore,  that  difference  signiﬁcantly  beneﬁted  women
(HR  =  0.31  [95%  CI:  0.10–0.96],  P  =  0.04)  [21].  Finally  and  particu-
larly,  the  eleven-year  results  of  the  NELSON  trial  were  recently
published  [16].  These  results  were  eagerly  awaited,  as  their  sta-
tistical  power  was  sufﬁcient  for  detecting  a  change  in  lung  cancer
mortality  in  men  (initially  planned  in  association  with  the  Dan-
ish  DLCST  study).  The  inclusion  criteria  of  the  NELSON  study  [20]
were different  from  those  of  the  NLST  (especially  the  lower  age
limit:  50  years).  The  NELSON  study  also  had  a  different  screening
schedule, with  CTs  at  baseline  (detection  of  prevalent  nodules),
one  year,  three  years  and  optionally  ﬁve  and  a  half  years.  It  also
200S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
Fig.  1.  Randomized  trials  on  low-dose  computed  tomography  for  lung  cancer  screening.
Table  1
Employed
 recommendations  grading  (Haute  Autorité  de  santé  [HAS;  French  National
Authority
 for  Health]).
A Established scientiﬁc  evidence
Founded on  strong  evidence  (level  1):  randomized
controlled
 trials  (RCTs)  with  high  statistical  power  and  no
major
 biases  or  meta-analyses  of  RCTs,  decision  analysis
based
 on  well-designed  studies
B Scientiﬁc presumption
Founded
 on  intermediate  evidence  (level  2):  RCTs  with
lesser
 statistical  power,  well-designed  non-randomized
studies,
 cohort  studies
C Low
 scientiﬁc  evidence
Founded
 on  lower  levels  of  evidence:  case  control  studies
(level
 3),  retrospective  studies,  case  series  studies,
comparative
 studies with important biases (level  4)
AE Expert  agreement
In
 the  absence  of  studies,  recommendations  are  founded
on
 consensus  among  the  expert  work  group  members,
after
 consultation  with  the  reading  group.  The  absence  of
grading
 does  not  imply  a  lack  of  pertinence  or  utility,  but  it
must
 lead  to  a  commitment  for  complementary  studies
differed  fundamentally  from  the  NLST  in  positive  screen  manage-
ment,  based  on  nodule  volume  and  evolution  at  three  months  in
patients with  50  to  500  mm3nodules.  The  NELSON  study  provided
positive  results  at  11  years  of  follow-up  even  without  the  initially-
planned  grouped  analyses  of  data  from  other  studies.  Indeed,  after
eight  years  of  follow-up,  it  showed  signiﬁcant  reductions  in  lung
cancer  mortality  of  about  25%  in  men  and  about  40  to  60%  in  women
[16].  As  of  this  writing,  the  UKLS  and  JECS  studies  have  not  yet
provided  consolidated  results.
There  are  also  a  number  of  French  studies  on  the  interest  of  lung
cancer  screening.  One  modeling  study  crossed  demographic  infor-
mation  on  the  French  population  with  data  published  upstream  of
the  NELSON  study  results.  Using  ﬁrst  the  strict  NLST  criteria  then
those  criteria  with  the  NELSON’s  50-year  age  threshold,  the  authors
of  that  modeling  study  reported  screening-eligible  populations  of
respectively  1650  and  2283  people.  According  to  that  study,  the  costof  screening  could  be  covered  by  a  modest,  10-cent  (D  )/pack  price
increase  for  cigarettes  [22].  A  prospective  cohort  study  (DEP  KP80)
was  carried  out  in  the  French  administrative  department  of  the
Somme  [23].  Using  the  inclusion  criteria  of  NLST  and  a  decisional
algorithm  adapted  from  NELSON,  its  baseline  results  showed  the
feasibility  and  effectiveness  of  a  yearly  LDCT  lung  cancer  screening
program.  DEP  KP80  recruited  1307  patients  in  two  and  a  half  years
and  reported  a  participation  rate  of  73%  and  a  positive  screening
rate  of  5.7%.  Of  these  positive  screenings,  45%  were  conﬁrmed  can-
cer  (n  =  24)  and  of  these  latter,  75%  were  detected  at  early  stages  (0
to  II).
The  authors  of  DEP  KP80  considered  their  results  sufﬁcient  to
justify  the  implementation  of  screening  in  France,  the  ﬁrst  step
of  which  would  be  the  deployment  of  large-scale  testing  in  pilot
regions.
#1  The  two  randomized  studies  with  patient  enrollments  con-
ferring  sufﬁcient  statistical  power  satisfactorily  demonstrated
the ability  of  LDCT  screening  to  signiﬁcantly  reduce  lung
cancer-speciﬁc mortality.  Thus,  in  accordance  with  all  inter-
national guidelines, the  experts  renew  their  recommendation
in favor  of  individual  screening  for  lung  cancer  in  France  as
per  the  conditions  laid  out  in  this  document  (grade  A).  Here,
we  deﬁned  individual  screening  as  the  systematic  proposal
of  screening,  as  described  in  this  document,  by  a  physician
to  an  eligible  patient,  independent  of  any  possible  national
programs.#2 Considering  the  rarity  of  data  on  the  feasibility  of  LDCT
screening  for  lung  cancer  in  France,  the  experts  recommend
the very  rapid  organization  and  funding  of  prospective  studies,
which, if  conclusive,  will  enable  the  deployment  of  lung  cancer
screening organized  at  the  national  level  (grade  AE).
#3  Lung  cancer  screening  should  be  carried  out  using  low-dose
non-contrast-enhanced  computed  tomography  (grade  A).
201S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
4.  To  whom  should  individual  lung  cancer  screening  be
proposed?
The  work  group  expressed  their  opinion  that  screening  should
be  proposed  only  to  patients  whose  characteristics  would  have
made  them  eligible  for  the  NLST  or  NELSON  study  (Fig.  1  and
Table 2)  [14,24] .  Consequently,  screening  should  be  proposed  to
all  patients  aged  50  to  74  years  with  a  history  of  current  or  for-
mer  (quit  ≤  10  years  prior)  smoking  counting  >  15  cigarettes/day
for  ≥  25  years  or  >  10  cigarettes/day  for  ≥  30  years.
In  the  NLST  and  NELSON  study,  the  upper  age  limit  for  screening
was  74  years.  The  United  States  Preventive  Services  Task  Force  rec-
ommends  screening  up  to  the  age  of  80  years  based  on  modeling
studies  using the NLST  contributively  and  performed  on  cohorts
of  American smokers  [25].  In  the  absence  of  prospective  Euro-
pean  data,  the  work  group  decided  to  maintain  the  upper  limit  of
screening  initiation  to  74  years  and  proposed  additional  research
on  advanced  age  groups.
In  the  NLST,  patients  who  had  quit  smoking  within  the  preced-
ing  15  years  were  eligible  for  enrollment.  In  the  NELSON  trial,  that
interval  was  limited  to  10  years.  The  present  expert  group  considers
that  patients  eligible  for  screening  on  all  other  criteria  and  having
quit  smoking  ≤  10  prior  or  optionally  ≤  15  years  prior  may  beneﬁt
from  screening.
A  number  of  teams  have  studied  the  contribution  of  risk  model-
ing,  which  integrates  novel  variables  to  optimize  the  identiﬁcation
of  screening  candidates.  Risk  scores  are  conceived  to  improve
screening  performance,  with  such  goals  as,  for  example,  reduc-
ing  the  number  of  individuals  to  screen  to  detect  one  cancer  or
prevent  one  death  [26].  These  scores,  often  built  upon  clinical
and/or  radiological  data,  do  appear  pertinent  [27–29] ,  but  none
have  been  compared  in  prospective  randomized  trials.  In  the  UKLS
trial,  the  LLPv2  (Liverpool  Lung  Project )  score  was  not  a  random-
ization  but  an  inclusion  criterion.  Of  all  the  randomized  trials,  the
UKLS  trial  identiﬁed  the  highest  proportion  of  stage  I  or  II  lung  can-
cers.  The  PLCOm2012  score  was  used  to  select  eligible  patients  in
the  prospective  PanCan  trial.  In  its  cohort,  the  cumulative  incidence
rate  for  cancer  was  signiﬁcantly  higher  than  that  of  NLST,  with  fur-
thermore  a  higher  proportion  of  stage  I/II  cancers  (77%  vs.  57%;
P  <  0.001).  For  other  lung  cancer  risk  factors  (professional  or  envi-
ronmental  carcinogen  exposure,  rare  hereditary  predispositions,
comorbidities),  there  are  currently  insufﬁcient  data  in  the  literature
to  propose  speciﬁc  recommendations.
All  patients  who  accept  screening  must  do  so  voluntarily  after
having  received  complete  information  on  the  possible  beneﬁts  and
risks  (see  below).  They  may  need  time  to  reﬂect  on  whether  to
accept  screening.  Current  smokers  must  be  strongly  encouraged  to
join  a  smoking  cessation  program  and  oriented  toward  profession-
als  and/or  institutions  specialized  in  smoking  cessation  (in  France:
http://www.tabac-info-service.fr ).  Encouraging  the  patient  to  stop
smoking  must  be  systematically  repeated  at  ever  screening  visit
and smoking  cessation  counseling  formally  integrated  in  the  pro-
cess  [30].  No  particular  cessation  strategy  has  demonstrated  its
superiority  over  any  other  [31–33] .
Patients  who  have  developed  symptoms  or  signs  suggestive  of
lung  cancer  (hemoptysis,  weight  loss  >  10%  of  normal  weight  and/or
lung  infection)  in  the  preceding  year  must  undergo  immediate
diagnostic  work-ups;  they  are  thus  not  candidates  for  screening.
Also,  screening  should  not  be  proposed  to  patients  meeting  NELSON
and/or  NLST  exclusion  criteria  (Table  2),  including  severe  comor-
bidities  contraindicating  invasive  thoracic  procedures  and  thus  any
surgical  treatments.  LDCT  screening  is  not  a  substitute  for  diagnos-
tic  examination(s)  when  respiratory  disease  is  suspected.  Finally,
patients  with  a  history  of  cancer  are  to  be  placed  under  speciﬁc
surveillance  and  thus  the  work  group  does  not  recommend  includ-
ing  them  in  individual  lung  cancer  screening  procedures.#4  Individual  LDCT  screening  for  lung  cancer  should  be  thor-
oughly explained  (informed  consent)  and  proposed  to  all
patients aged  >  50  years  who  have  a  current  or  recent  past
(cessation  within the preceding  10  years)  history  of  smok-
ing >  15  cigarettes/day  for  >  25  years  OR  >  10  cigarettes/day
for  >  30  years  and  who  do  not  meet  exclusion  criteria.  Entry
into  a  screening  program  may  be  proposed  to  patients  up  to
74  years  of  age  (grade  A).
#5  Ex-smokers  who  meet  the  above  criteria  but  quit  smok-
ing >  10 but <  15  years  prior  may  be  proposed  screening  as  an
option (grade  AE).
#6  Patients  who  have  a  history  of  cancer,  present  clinical  signs
suggesting  cancer,  recently  underwent  a  thoracic  CT  for  other
reasons,  or  present  one  or  several  severe  comorbidities  con-
traindicating invasive thoracic procedures are ineligible for
LDCT
 screening  (grade  A).
5.  What  is  the  optimal  duration  of  screening?
There  are  few  prospective  data  available  on  the  optimal  dura-
tion  of  lung  cancer  screening  in  at-risk  patients.  The  cohort  from
the  ELCAP  study  was  compared  to  that  of  another  study  (CARET)
not  involving  screening.  The  comparison  clearly  showed  that  inter-
rupting  screening  was  associated  with  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  lung
cancer-related  death  [34].  Complementarily,  Veronesi  et  al.  showed
that  the  rate  of  lung  cancer  detection  remained  stable  across  a  long
duration  of  yearly  LDCT  screening  [35,36] .
Other  elements  also  argue  in  favor  of  regular  screening  for
lung  cancer,  such  as  its  comparability  with  other  cancer  screen-
ing programs,  the  theoretical  need  for  continuous  screening,  or  the
consistent  cancer  detection  rates  observed  in  all  three  of  the  NLST’s
annual  screenings,  respectively  1%,  0.7%  and  0.9%  [12].  The  persis-
tence  of  the  effectiveness  of  screening  when  maintained  beyond
three  to  ﬁve  years  was  recently  demonstrated  in  the  NELSON  study,
wherein  a  fourth  screening  CT  was  done  5.5  years  after  inclusion
and  concerned  thus  5279  patients  (i.e.,  68%  of  the  initially-included
experimental  group).  That  fourth  screening  was  positive  in  105
patients  (i.e.,  2%  of  the  5279  participants)  among  which  43  (0.8%)
were  diagnosed  with  cancer  for  a  positive  predictive  value  (PPV)  of
41%,  which  was  similar  to  the  mean  PPV  of  all  four  of  the  NELSON
study’s  screening  rounds  [37].  Thus,  at  ﬁve  and  a  half  years  and  even
further up  to  eleven  years,  the  cumulative  number  of  detected  lung
cancers  remained  signiﬁcantly  higher  in  the  experimental  group  vs.
the  control  group.  Finally,  the  relative  risk  of  lung  cancer-related
death  was  signiﬁcantly  reduced  from  24%  by  year  at  eight  to  ten
years  and  by  22%  at  eleven  years  in  men.  In  women  lung  cancer
mortality  was  signiﬁcantly  reduced  by  54%,  59%,  and  48%  at  7,  8
and  9  years,  respectively  [16].
More  recently,  the  ten-year  data  of  the  randomized  MILD  trial
were  published.  In  MILD,  either  annual  (n  =  1190)  or  biennial
(n  =  1186)  screening  was  maintained  for  ten  years  and  the  results
compared  to  those  of  a  control  group  [20].  The  trial  showed  an  over-
all  reduction  in  cancer-related  mortality,  with  that  beneﬁt  being
more  pronounced  after  ﬁve  years.  Thus,  at  ten  years,  the  sex,  age
and  consumption  (in  PY)-adjusted  overall  death  risk  was  signiﬁ-
cantly  lowered  by  32%  and  the  lung  cancer-related  death  risk  was
reduced  by  68%.  These  data  convincingly  demonstrate  that  screen-
ing  continues  to  reduce  the  risk  of  lung  cancer-related  death  when
continued  for  at  least  ten  years.
#7 LDCT  screening  should  be  continued  for  at  least  5.5  to
10  years  (grade  A).
202S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
Table 2
Eligibility,
 exclusion  and  exit  criteria  for  individual  lung  cancer  screening.
Eligibility  criteria  Exclusion  criteria  Exit  criteria
Age between  50  and  74  years;  AND
smoking
 >  10  cigarettes/day  for  >  30  years
OR >  15  cigarettes/day  for  >  25  years;  AND
current
 smoker  or  ex-smoker  having  quit  in
the
 preceding  10  years  OR  preceding  15  years
(OPTION)Inability to  climb  two  ﬂoors  by  stairway  without
stoppingCessation  of  smoking  dating  >  10  years
(optionally
 >  15  years)
AND
 accepting  screening  after  provision  of
informed
 consentWeight ≥  140  kg  Age  >  74  years  after  3  CT  examinations
(excluding
 studies)
AND
 willing  to accept help  for  smoking
cessationHistory of thoracic CT  within  the  preceding  year
(except screening  CT)Development of an  exclusion  criterion
History
 of  lung  cancer  within  preceding  ﬁve  years  or
under
 treatment  for  lung  cancer
History
 of  cancer  currently  monitored  by  thoracic
imaging
 studies
Severe
 comorbidity(ies)  contraindicating  therapeutic
possibilities
 or  invasive  thoracic  procedures
Current
 or  recent  respiratory  symptomatology
suggestive
 of cancer (hemoptysis, weight loss,  recent
pulmonary  infection)
6. How  frequently  should  screening  CT  be  performed?
The  optimal  interval  between  screening  LDCT  has  not  yet  been
clearly  established.  In  a  debated  interim  analysis  within  the  MILD
trial,  an  increase  in  the  cumulative  incidence  of  lung  cancers  was
observed  in  the  annual  compared  to  the  biennial  screening  group
(excluding  nonsolid  nodules),  but  there  was  no  sign  of  an  increase
in  advanced-stage  detections  in  the  biennial  group.  Furthermore,
there  were  no  statistically  signiﬁcant  differences  between  the
annual  and  biennial  screening  groups  in  terms  of  mortality,  test
performance  (sensitivity,  speciﬁcity,  predictive  values)  or  number
of  interval  lung  cancers  (those  detected  between  screening  CT)
[38–40] .
The  NELSON  trial  performed  a  baseline  screening  (ﬁrst  round)
and  thereafter  spaced  their  screenings  incrementally,  with  ﬁrst  a
one-year  (second  round),  then  a  two-year  (third  round)  and  ﬁnally
an  optional  two  and  a  half-year  (fourth  round)  interval.  In  com-
parison  to  the  trial’s  second  screening  round,  the  fourth  round
detected  signiﬁcantly  less  stage  IA  cancers  (75.9%  vs.  60.9%)  and
more  stage  IIIB/IV  cancers  (6.8%  vs.  17.3%;  P  =  0.02).  In  comparison
to  the  third  screening  round,  the  fourth  round  again  detected  less
stage  IA  cancers  (72.7%  vs.  60.9%)  and  more  stage  IIIB/IV  cancers,
but  this  time  without  statistical  signiﬁcance  (P  =  0.10).  Nonethe-
less,  the  number  of  cancers  detected  in  the  fourth  screening  round
(ﬁve  and  a  half  years  after  baseline)  was  only  slightly  and  statis-
tically  insigniﬁcantly  lower  than  those  of  the  preceding  rounds,
suggesting  a  screening  performance  (rate  of  lung  cancer  detection)
that is  not  inferior  to  other  intervals.  There  was  however  the  draw-
back  of  a  greater  number  of  interval  cancers  observed  in  that  two
and  a  half-year  period  between  the  trial’s  third  and  four  screen-
ing  rounds  [37].  An  analysis  of  the  results  from  the  one  and  two
year  intervals  (second  and  third  rounds)  showed  that  there  was  no
statistically  signiﬁcant  difference  between  them  in  the  number  of
cancers  detected  in  later  stages  (P  =  0.09)  [41].
In  the  absence  of  personalized  risk  assessments,  these  results
argue  in  favor  of  a  screening  interval  of  two  years  at  the  most.
Based  on  a  modeling  study  of  the  NELSON  data,  it  does  appear  that
shorter  screening  intervals  do  have  a  greater  effect  on  reducing
mortality,  with  one,  two  and  three-year  intervals  between  screen-
ings  reducing  that  endpoint  respectively  from  11  to  21%,  6.5  to  9.6%,
and  4.6  to  6%.  Annual  screening  does  thus  appear  to  be  more  cost-
effective  when  considered  in  terms  of  life-years  saved  compared
to  saved  costs  [42,43] .  Furthermore,  another  work  derived  from
the  NELSON  trial  demonstrated  a  signiﬁcantly  longer  preclinical
time  (the  time  needed  to  progress  from  stage  IA  to  stage  II)  for  IAadenocarcinoma in  women  (2.44  years)  compared  to  men
(1.82 years),  but  no  such  difference  was  detected  for  other
histopathological  types  between  sexes  [44].
Equally,  the  results  of  preceding  screening  rounds  appear  to
be  an  important  predictive  element  [45].  Indeed,  post-hoc  anal-
yses  of  NLST  data  have  shown  that  incidence  and  mortality  are
inversely  related  to  a  preceding  negative  screening  and  that  the
effect  strengthens  with  a  second  preceding  negative  screening.
Other  variables  signiﬁcantly  associated  with  the  risk  of  cancer
diagnosis  were  a  known  history  of  COPD  and  CT  detection  of
emphysema  [46].
These  data  were  furthermore  conﬁrmed  in  the  NELSON  study.  In
its  fourth  round,  the  risk  of  lung  cancer  was  0.6%  for  patients  with
negative  results  from  all  the  preceding  three  rounds,  but  1.6%  for
those  with  at  least  one  indeterminate  round  (but  never  a  positive
round)  and  3.7%  for  those  with  an  indeterminate  third  round  (vs.
0.6%  for  those  with  a  negative  third  round)  [37].  Finally,  the  NELSON
trial  also  showed  that  the  risk  of  cancer  was  correlated  to  nodule
size  and  nodule  volume  doubling  time  (VDT)  [47].
Thus,  several  authors  have  suggested  personalizing  screening
intervals  after  the  second  screening  as  a  function  of  the  patient’s
individual  risk  proﬁle  as  determined  by  prediction  scores  such  as
PLCO m2012 or  the  radiological  data  from  the  ﬁrst  (baseline)  screen-
ing.  Very  recently,  the  team  behind  the  PLCO  cancer  risk  prediction
model  developed  and  validated  a  model  wherein  preceding  screen-
ing  results  are  considered  in  addition  to  the  PLCO m2012 variables
[45].  Their  results  suggested  that  for  at-risk  patients  (PLCO  >  1.3%
for the  NCCN;  >  2%  risk  in  the  Cancer  Care  Ontario  pilot  study  cohort),
the  screening  interval  should  be  maintained  at  one  year  whereas
for  others,  an  interval  of  two  years  may  be  proposed.  Setting  a
screening  interval  based  on  individual  risk  would  of  course  reduce
costs  and  furthermore  lower  exposure  to  radiation  for  people  at  low
risk,  who  could  be  scheduled  for  screening  once  every  two  years.
However,  no  prospective  studies  have  been  done  on  this  strategy.
7. What  technical  procedures  are  necessary  for  screening?
Lung  cancer  screening  is  performed  via  a  volumetric,  unen-
hanced LDCT scan [48,49] .  Scanners  with  ≥  16  raws  of  detectors
should  be used  for  acquisitions,  these  latter  taken  with  the  patient
in the supine  position,  arms  extended  behind  the  head,  during  a
deep-inspiration  breath-hold  and  covering  the  lung  from  its  apex
through  to  the  inferior  pleural  recesses.  Native  slice  thickness
should be  ≤  1.25  mm  with  a  30%-overlap  reconstruction  to  enable
volumetric  analysis  of  abnormalities.
203S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
#8  Considering  the  current  state  of  knowledge  and  the  absence
of risk  personalization,  the  expert  group  recommends  a  max-
imum interval  of  two  years  between  LDCT  screenings  (grade
B).#9 Pending  speciﬁc  studies,  it  seems  reasonable  to  initially
propose  two  screenings  with  a  one-year  interval  between
them.  When  both  are  negative  and  the  patient  has  no  risk
factors  other  than  tobacco  use  (e.g.,  emphysema,  history  of
COPD),  biennial  screening  may  be  proposed.  Screening  must
however remain  annual  in the presence  of  any  additional  risk
factors and/or  any  indeterminate  screening  result  (grade  AE).
There  is  currently  no  consensus  deﬁnition  of  “low-dose”  CT.
Considering the  diverse  range  of  employed  CT  equipment,  radia-
tion  limits  should  not  be  expressed  in  terms  of  volts  or  milliamps
but  instead  in volume CT  dose  index  (CTDI),  with  a  goal  of  achiev-
ing a  volumetric  CTDI  (or  CTDIvol)  of  no  more  than  3  mGy  in
a standard-size patient (height,  170  cm;  weight,  70  kg)  [50,51]
and for  instance  ≤  0.4  mGy  for  patients  weighing  <  50  kg;  ≤  0.8  mGy
for  patients weighing ≥  50  to  ≤  80  kg;  and  ≤  1.6  mGy  for  patients
weighing >  80  kg.  DLP  and  CTDI  should  be  indicated  on  the  imag-
ing study report. Ultra-low-dose  CT  (dose  close  to  that  of  a
frontal +  lateral  chest  X-ray)  currently  lacks  sufﬁcient  validation  for
deployment in screening  [50–52] .  However,  techniques  to  optimize
image  noise  to  irradiation  ratios  such  as  iterative  reconstruction  or
deep learning are  recommended.
Readings  should  be  done  at  the  workstation  from  axial  slices  no
thicker  than  1.5  mm  reconstructed  in  lung  (parenchyma)  and  medi-
astinal  windows  and  furthermore  in  multiplanar  reconstruction  for
detected  abnormalities.  Maximum  intensity  projections  with  slab
thicknesses  of  5  to  8  mm  should  be  used  to  optimize  the  detection
of  peripheral  solid  nodules  [53].  Second-reading  computer-aided
detection  (CAD)  has  been  shown  to  increase  lung  nodule  detection
sensitivity  (76%)  compared  to  results  provided  by  single  (50%)  or
double  (63%)  human  readers  [54].  Within  a  study  involving  400
CT  examinations  randomly  chosen  from  the  NELSON  trial  (double
radiologist  reading),  22%  of  nodules  ≥  50  mm3,  including  one  can-
cer, were  identiﬁed  only  by  CAD  [55].  That  study  reported  detection
rates  of  78%  and  97%  respectively  for  double  readings  and  CAD
(i.e.,  19%  more  nodules  using  the  latter  compared  to  the  former).
It  also  reported  that  false-positives  by  CAD  could  be  limited  by
excluding  nodules  measuring  less  than  50  mm3(equivalent  to  a
mean  diameter  of  5  mm)  [55].  Those  results  were  conﬁrmed  in  a
study  performed  on  anthropomorphic  phantoms  to  compare  vari-
ous  combinations  of  single  or  double  readings  and  three  different
CAD  programs  for  solid  and  nonsolid  nodules  measuring  ≥  5  mm.
Combining  one  human  reader  with  one  CAD  provided  sensitivities
constantly  greater  than  those  obtained  by  any  combination  of  two
CADs  (97–99%  vs.  85–88%)  [56].  In  the  setting  of  organized  screen-
ing,  it  appears  more  realistic  to  systematically  deploy  a  second
reading  by  CAD  with  a  predeﬁned  detection  threshold  rather  than
double  radiologist  readings.  Limitations  to  the  use  of  CAD  include
an  increase  in  reading  time,  the  management  of  false-positives  and
a  lower  sensitivity  for  the  detection  of  nonsolid  nodules  [57].  In
the  near  future,  the  introduction  of  artiﬁcial  intelligence  should
improve  CAD  performance  and  ultimately  will  ﬁnd  itself  the  subject
of  research,  notably  through  “radio-banking”  [58].  An  advantage  of
CAD  is  that  it  can  be  paired  with  volumetric  evaluation  of  detected
nodules  for  immediate  classiﬁcation  according  to  guidelines  [59].
The  interpretation  of  screening-derived  CT  images  must  be
entrusted  to  radiologists  specialized  in  thoracic  imaging  or  thereto
trained  via  speciﬁc,  validated  programs.  Nodule  volume  mea-
surements should  be  done  with  dedicated  software  on  standard
reconstructions.  If  that  is  not  possible,  measurements  may  be  takenTable  3
Minimal
 requirements  for  lung  cancer  CT  screening  structured  report.
Type  Variable  (unit)
Technical  data  Dose-length  product  (mGY.cm)
Delivered
 dose  (Sv)
CTDIvol (mGy)
NodulecharacterizationAttenuation (solid/nonsolid/part-solid)
Location (laterality  and  lobe)
Number
 of  slices  at  nodule  center
Findings
 suggesting benignity (calciﬁcation; fat
density; typical lung  lymph  node  aspects)
Prevalent or  incident
Morphology
 (regular  or  spiculated  borders,
periﬁssural
 aspects)
Involvement
 of  neighboring  structures  (yes/no)
Dimension: solid  nodule: volume (in mm3);
nonsolid: average  of  the  long  and  short  axes;
part-solid:
 volume  of  solid  component  and  average
of
 the  long  and  short  axes
VDT (days) and comparison to preceding
examinations
Emphysema
 Yes/no  (if  yes,  number  of  affected  lobes)
Otherabnormality(ies)justifyingmanagement:parenchymatous,mediastinal,abdominal
CTDI: CT  dose  index;  VDT:  volume  doubling  time.
manually  following  the  Fleischner  Society’s  recommendations  for
fortuitously-discovered  nodules  [60].  Manual  measurement  of
nodule  diameter  must  be  done  on  reconstructed  sections  with  lung
window  settings.  The  average  of  the  long  and  short  axes  should  be
used  to  express  the  size  of  nodules  ≤  10  mm.  The  maximum  diam-
eter  is  sufﬁcient  for  nodules  >  10  mm  or  with  a  round  shape.  All
measurements  are  expressed  in  millimeters  rounded  to  the  near-
est  whole  number.  For  part-solid  nodules,  the  solid  component  and
global  diameters  must  be  indicated.
The  screening  CT  examination  must  be  assessed  ﬁrst  as  a  sep-
arate entity  then  in  comparison  with  all  available  preceding  CT
(including  the  oldest  ones)  to  evaluate  lesion  evolution.  The  CT
report  must  include  all  observations  necessary  for  determining  the
most  pertinent  course  for  clinical  management  [61].  A  radiologi-
cal  report  model  will  help  to  ensure  inter-reader  reproducibility
(Table  3).  Screening  CT  imaging  ﬁles  are  to  be  stored  on  a  central-
ized  server  in  the  Digital  Imaging  and  Communications  in  Medicine
format  for  quality  control  and  research  purposes.
Each  patient  should  be  encouraged  to  have  all  his/her  iterative
screenings  performed  in  a  single  center.  Should  that  recommenda-
tion  not  be  followed  by  the  patient,  centralized  ﬁle  management
may  nonetheless  enable  access  to  CT  histories  and  their  indis-
pensable  comparison.  All  medical  centers  having  the  necessary
technical/organizational  capacities  and  pertinently  specialized  or
trained radiologists  may  propose  lung  cancer  LDCT  screening.
#10 Lung  cancer  screening  should  be  done  via  unenhanced
LDCT at  a  DLP  <  100  mGy.cm  and  a  CTDI  consistent  with  patient
weight,  and  includes  volumetric  measurement  of  any  detected
abnormalities  (grade  A).
#11 Second-reading  computer-aided  detection  is  recom-
mended (grade  AE).
#12  The  use  of  a  minimum  radiological  report  model  is  rec-
ommended (grade  AE).
204S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
8.  How  screening  CT  should  be  interpreted?
There  are  several  formalized  guidelines  for  screening-detected
nodule  management  including  those  of  the  Fleischner  Society
[49,62]  –  which  were  edited  for  incidentally  found  nodules  –
or the  LungRADS  classiﬁcation  (updated  to  version  1.1  in  2019)
of  the  American  College  of  Radiology  (The  American  College
of  Radiology’s  Lung  CT  Screening  Reporting  &  Data  System
is  available  at  https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Reporting-
and-Data-Systems/Lung-Rads ,  accessed  05  July  2019).  These  guide-
lines  deﬁne  positive  tests  in  different  ways  and  have  not  been
subjected  to  prospective  comparative  trials  as  of  this  writing.  In
addition  to  those  formalized  guidelines,  there  are  also  clinical  trial
protocols,  including  those  for  the  NLST  and  NELSON  study,  that  have
been  prospectively  tested  in  the  setting  of  a  randomized  trial  with
deﬁnitions  for  positive,  indeterminate  (for  NELSON)  or  negative
tests  as  well  as  associated  decisional  algorithms.  The  NELSON  trial
deﬁned  a positive screening via a combination  of  nodule  presence
and
 size  (volume)  with  a  later  contribution  of  VDT.  That  approach
yielded a PPV of 41%. Comparatively, the  NLST,  wherein  all  non-
calciﬁed
 nodules  >  4  mm  were  considered  positive,  reported  a  PPV
of  3.6% and a criticized false-positive  rate  of  96%  [12,47,48,58] .
Several post-hoc  analyses  were  programmed  as  part  of  the  NEL-
SON trial with the goal  of  better  identifying  at-risk  abnormalities
by, for  example,  reﬁning  thresholds  for  nodule  volume  or  VDT.  On
another point, those  analyses  showed  notably  that  incident  nodules
(those  not  present  in  preceding  screenings)  carried  a  greater  risk  of
malignancy [63,64] .  The  threshold  reﬁnements  however,  although
interesting  in  theory,  did  not  appear  to  demonstrate  an  interest.
Indeed,  such  changes  performed  inferiorly  to  the  initial  protocol,
notably  in  terms  of  PPV  and  speciﬁcity  [47,65] .
Nonetheless,  a  group  of  authors  who  participated  in  screening
programs  in  eight  European  countries  recently  published  an  expert
opinion  recommending  the  use  of  the  threshold  reﬁnements,  devel-
oped  in  the  above-mentioned  post-hoc  analyses,  for  solid  nodules
[58].  Those  threshold  reﬁnements  are  also  forwarded  in  recent  rec-
ommendations  by  the  European  Society  of  Radiology  (ESR)  and
the  European  Respiratory  Society  (ERS)  [66].  The  reﬁned  positivity
thresholds  vary  for  prevalent  (nodules  present  at  baseline:  100  to
300  mm3and  VDT  of  600  days)  or  incident  (30  to  200  mm3and  VDT
of  600  days  and  remaining  inferior  to  200  mm3[or  8  mm])  nodules,
these latter necessitating a  greater  level  of  attention.  Notwithstand-
ing the  positioning  of  these  other  expert  groups,  the  French  expert
group  recommends  the  nodule  interpretation  rules  deﬁned  in  the
initial  NELSON  protocol,  whatever  the  type  of  nodule,  considering
that  these  rules  only  have  been  validated  in  a  prospective  random-
ized  trial  [16,48] .  This  recommendation  necessitated  votes  among
the  work  group  members  (20  votes  cast)  for  solid  (13  votes  in  favor
of  the  NELSON  trial  rules  [48],  5  votes  in  favor  of  the  post-hoc-
developed  rules  [47,58] ,  1  vote  for  neither,  1  no  opinion  vote)  and
subsolid  (10  votes  in  favor  of  the  NELSON  trial  rules  [48],  5  votes
in  favor  of  the  Fleischner  Society  rules  [62],  2  votes  in  favor  of  the
LungRADS  v1.1  rules,  1  vote  for  neither,  2  no  opinion  votes)  nodules.
The  analysis  of  a  CT  screening  will  give  one  of  three  possible
results:  a  “positive”  screening,  leading  to  management  involving  a
multidisciplinary  team  (MDT)  meeting  due  to  a  high  probability
of  lung  cancer  [67];  a  “negative”  screening,  ﬁnding  no  suspi-
cious  abnormalities  and  necessitating  only  the  maintenance  of  the
screening  schedule;  and  ﬁnally  an  “indeterminate”  screening,  rep-
resenting only a  temporary  result  and  necessitating  a  follow-up
CT  in  three  months.  That  follow-up  imaging  study  remains  an
unenhanced  LDCT.  The  probability  of  malignancy  for  a  screening-
detected  nodule  depends  primarily  on  its  density  (solid,  part-solid,
nonsolid),  volume  (or  diameter)  and  evolution.  In  the  case  of  mul-
tiple  nodules,  the  strategy  to  be  deployed  is  that  pertinent  to  the
most  suspicious  nodule.#13  The  expert  group  recommends  using  the  protocol
deployed in  the  NELSON  trial  for  the  interpretation  of  all  nod-
ule types  (solid,  part-solid,  nonsolid)  detected  in  LDCT .  This
recommendation  was subjected  to  votes  by  the  work  group
members (20  votes  cast):  13/20  voted  for  this  recommenda-
tion  in  the  setting  of  solid  nodules  and  10/20  voted  for  it  in  the
setting  of  subsolid  nodules  (grade  AE).
9. Decision-making  strategy  for solid nodules
The  ﬁrst  step  in the presence  of  a  solid  nodule  is  to  determine  if
it  meets  benignity  criteria. If the nodule is  entirely  calciﬁed  or  if  it
has a  central  calciﬁcation  on two orthogonal  planes,  the  screening
is considered  negative  regardless  of  nodule  size.  In  this  case,  the
established screening  schedule  may  be  maintained.  Other  benig-
nity  criteria  include:  an  intranodular  fat  deposit  (−40  to  −120
Hounsﬁeld  units)  or  features  suggesting  an  intrapulmonary  lymph
node  (solid  homogenous  density,  size  <  10  mm,  <  10  mm  from  a
pleural  surface,  location  inferior  to  the  tracheal  carina,  triangular
or oval  shape,  connection  to  adjacent  pleura  by  a  thin  septum)  [14].
For  non-calciﬁed  solid  nodules,  the  main  feature  to  be  consid-
ered  is  nodal  volume,  or,  failing  that,  the  mean  of  the  long  and  short
axes  (Fig.  2).  Because  nodules  are  never  perfectly  spherical,  there
is  no  strict  proportionality  between  volume  and  diameter  mea-
surements.  As  a  simpliﬁcation  measure,  the  diameter  thresholds
given  below  have  been  rounded;  consequently,  they  do  not  corre-
late  strictly  with  the  corresponding  volume  thresholds.  It  is  also
important  to  underline  the  need  for  identical  acquisition  parame-
ters  when  calculating  VDT  from  two  volumetric  evaluations.
Non-calciﬁed  nodules  measuring  <  50  mm3(or  with  a  diam-
eter  <  5  mm)  indicate  a  negative  screening  and  the  patient  may
maintain  the  established  screening  schedule.  Non-calciﬁed  nod-
ules  measuring  ≥  500  mm3(or  with  a  diameter  ≥  10  mm)  indicate
a  positive  screening  and  the  patient  must  be  referred  to  an
MDT  for  the  determination  of  complementary  investigations.  Non-
calciﬁed  nodules  measuring  in  between  those  thresholds  indicate
an  indeterminate  screening.  A  follow-up  CT  should  be  scheduled
at  three  months  (6–8  weeks  for  incidental  nodules)  for  nodal  vol-
ume  (or  mean  diameter)  comparisons  and  VDT  calculations.  A
VDT  ≥  400  days  indicates  a  negative  test  and  the  patient  may  return
to  the  established  screening  schedule.  Inversely,  a  VDT  <  400  days
indicates  a  positive  test  and  the  patient  must  be  referred  to  a  MDT
(Fig.  2).
#14 For  non-calciﬁed  solid  nodules,  the  volume  thresholds
of <  50  mm3and  ≥  500  mm3indicate  respectively  negative  and
positive  screenings.  Patients  with  nodal  volumes  in  between
the  above  thresholds  should  be  scheduled  for  a  follow-up  CT
in three  months  (6–8  weeks  for  incidental  nodules).  Calculated
upon that  follow-up  CT ,  VDTs  ≥  400  days  and  <  400  days  indi-
cate  respectively  negative  and  positive  tests  (grade  A).
10. Decision-making  strategy  for  subsolid  nodules
Particularities  in  the  management  of  subsolid  nodules  arise
from,  on  one  hand,  their  propensity  to  self-resolve  (approxi-
mately  50%  of  nodules)  but,  on  the  other  hand,  their  tendency
to  become  adenocarcinomas—albeit  generally  non  or  minimally
invasive—when  they  do  not  resolve  [62,68] .  It  is  these  indolent
lesions  that  are  most  likely  to  expose  patients  to  overdiagnosis
[69,70] .  Thus,  in  the  presence  of  subsolid  nodules,  surveillance
should  be  given  priority  to  avoid  that  risk  [58].  Also,  in  this
205S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
Fig.  2.  Proposition  for  a  non-calciﬁed  solid  lung  nodule  decisional  algorithm  (adapted  from  [48]).
setting,  the  reproducibility  of  volumetric  measurements  is  reduced.
It  is  also  important  here  to  re-emphasize  the  irrelevance  of18FDG
PET-CT  for  nonsolid  nodules.
In  a  position  statement,  some  European  experts  recommended
the  deployment  of  the  protocol  proposed  by  the  British  Thoracic
Society  [58,71] .  That  protocol  is  however  complex  and  unvalidated
in  prospective  trials  as  of  this  writing.  With  the  present  document,
the  French  expert  group  recommends  the  prospectively-validated
NELSON  trial  protocol  [48].  This  latter  distinguishes  nonsolid  and
part-solid  nodules.  Nonsolid  nodules  are  described  using  the  mean
of  the  long  and  short  axes.  When  it  is  <  8  mm,  the  screening  may
be  considered  negative.  When  it  is  ≥  8  mm,  the  screening  should  be
considered  indeterminate  and  the  patient  rescheduled  for  a  follow-
up  CT  in  three  months.  If  no  solid  component  has  appeared  the
screening  is  considered  negative;  otherwise,  it  is  considered  pos-
itive  (Fig.  3).  Specialist  opinion  should  be  however  considered  in
case  of  ground-glass  opacity  extension  (≥  2  mm)  only  (with  no  solid
component  appearance).  Part-solid  nodules  are  described  by  the
mean  of  the  long  and  short  axes  and  the  volume  of  the  solid  com-
ponent.  The  decisional  algorithm  proposes  pathways  as  a  function
of  those  two  variables  (Fig.  4).
#15 In  the  presence  of  a  nonsolid  nodule,  the  screening  is
considered  negative  when  the  mean  diameter  is  <  8  mm;  inde-
terminate  when  the  mean  diameter  is  ≥  8  mm;  and  positive  if  a
solid component has developed  at  the  time  of  the  three-month
follow-up
 CT  (grade  A).
#16 In  the  presence  of  a  prevalent  part-solid  nodule,  the
screening is  considered  negative  when  the  mean  diameter
of the  nodule  is  <  8  mm  and  the  volume  of  the  solid  com-
ponent is  <  50  mm3;  indeterminate  when  the  mean  diameter
is ≥  8  mm  or  when  the  volume  of  the  solid  component  is  ≥  50
and  <  500  mm3;  and  positive  when  the  volume  of  the  solid
component  is  ≥  500  mm3,  or  when  the  volume  of  the  solid
component  is  ≥  50  and  <  500  mm3,  and  the  nonsolid  compo-
nent evolves  rapidly  (VDT  <  400  days  at  three-month  follow-up
scanner).11.  What  information  should  be  provided  to  eligible
patients?
Cancer  screening  is  of  interest  only  if  it  reduces  mortality
from  the  cancer  it  targets.  Screening  for  lung  cancer  does  so,
and  in  a  statistically  signiﬁcant  fashion,  as  shown  by  three  stud-
ies,  the  American  NLST  (>  50,000  participants)  and  the  European
NELSON  (>  15,000  participants)  and  MILD  (>  4000  participants)
studies.  Thus,  deploying  lung  cancer  screening  does  appear  to  be
advantageous,  but  doing  so  has  consequences  that  must  be  com-
municated  to  screening-eligible  patients  (Appendix  1).  Principally,
these  latter  must  be  informed  about  the  high-risk  of  discovering  an
abnormality—whatever  the  nature—that  could  necessitate  further
and  sometimes  invasive  investigations.  Considering  the  NELSON
data,  of  every  1000  patients  who  underwent  screening,  22  had  pos-
itive  results,  and  among  them,  9  were  ultimately  diagnosed  with
lung  cancer.  That  result  implies  13  false-positives  that  would  need
complementary  examinations,  most  being  supplementary  imaging
studies  rather  than  invasive  procedures  that  could  cause  compli-
cations.  Information  provided  to  patients  must  emphasize  that
the  risk  of  cancer  discovery  remains  low  at  about  0.9  to  3.7%  in
the  screening-eligible  population  [12,16] .  The  psychological  impact
resulting  from  the  possible  discovery  of  an  abnormality  must  be
discussed  with  patients,  as  must  the  sometimes  large  amount  of
time  needed  to  determine  benignity  or  malignancy.  On  those  points
however,  several  research  teams  have  looked  at  the  effects  of  LDCT
cancer  screening  on  patient  anxiety  and  quality  of  life  and  reported
relatively  reassuring  ﬁndings  [72–77] .
Also  to  be  considered  is  the  risk  of  overdiagnosis  (i.e.,  the
discovery  of  indolent  tumors  that  would  have  never  manifested
clinically  nor  caused  the  death  of  the  patient).  That  said,  this  risk
is  likely  globally  infrequent  in  lung  cancer,  where  VDT  is  usually
short, about  180  days  on  average  [78,79] .  Evaluating  overdiagno-
sis  in  this  setting  is  complex.  According  to  different  studies  and
especially  different  employed  methodologies,  it  may  occur  in  0
to  67%  of  cases  [18,80,81] .  The  NLST  reported  an  estimated  1.38
cases  of  overdiagnosis  for  every  320  patients  who  would  need  to
206S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
Fig.  3.  Proposition  for  a  nonsolid  lung  nodule  decisional  algorithm  (adapted  from  [48]).
Fig.  4.  Proposition  for  a  part-solid  (or  sub-solid  nodule)  lung  nodule  decisional  algorithm  (adapted  from  ref.  [48]).
be  screened  to  avoid  one  lung  cancer  death  [80].  Very  recently,
an  article  on  extended  follow-up  results  (12  years)  for  the  NLST
reported  a  reassuring  3%  rate  of  overdiagnosis,  noting  however  that
this  was  after  the  exclusion  of  bronchioloalveolar/lepidic  adeno-
carcinomas  (corresponding  morphologically  to  subsolid  nodules),
which  carry  a  very  high  rate  of  overdiagnosis,  approaching  80%  [70].
Thus,  the  risk  of  overdiagnosis  in  lung  cancer  screening  appears
to  be  present  mainly  in  subsolid  nodules,  which  show  longer
VDTs,  sometimes  exceeding  400  days.  Nonetheless,  the  degener-
ative  potential  of  subsolid  nodules  must  not  be  underestimated  as
they  are  able  to  evolve  sometimes  quite  belatedly,  into  invasive
and  even  metastatic  cancer.  Therefore,  some  of  these  nodules  may,
in  reality,  be  slow-growing  cancers  [69,82] ,  which  leads  less  to  a
overdiagnosis  bias  than  to  a  lead–time  bias.  These  lesions  thus  do
require long-term  monitoring  and  may  deserve  MDT  consideration.
Unneeded  investigations and  treatments  can  be  avoided  by
following  recommendations  for  the  management  of  screening-
detected  nodules.  In  the  NELSON  trial,  264  subsolid  nodules  were
detected in  234  patients,  representing  3.3%  of  all  detected  nod-
ules.  It  must  be  underlined  that  more  than  half  of  those  nodulesdisappeared  during  follow-up,  conﬁrming  their  benignity  and
probable  infectious  etiology.  Of  the  33  subsolid  nodules  resected
in  the  NELSON  trial,  28  were  conﬁrmed  as  non-small  cell  lung  can-
cers,  among  which  nine  were  in  situ  adenocarcinomas.  Of  the  19
resected  invasive  cancers,  16  had  VDTs  >  400  days.  The  other  nod-
ules  were  assigned  to  monitoring  [83].  Only  0.7%  of  the  NELSON
trial  participants  had  incident  subsolid  nodules  [84].
Also,  an  important  isue  is  the  radiation  exposure  resulting  from
repeat  CT  examination.  In  the  NLST,  the  mean  LDCT  dose  was
1.5  mSv.  The  mean  natural  irradiation  in  France  is  2.9  mSv  per
year  (Institut  de  Radioprotection  et  de  Sûreté  Nucléaire  [IRSN];
French  Institute  for  Radioprotection  and  Nuclear  Safety,  2015).
For  comparison,  frontal  and  frontal  +  lateral  chest  X-rays  deliver
respectively  0.05  and  0.2  mSv.  LDCT  screening-eligible  patients
should be  informed  that  any  one  CT  corresponds  to  six  months
of  natural exposure  at  the  most.  Although  the  risk  of  devel-
oping  radiation-induced  cancer  cannot  be  totally  eliminated,  it
does  appear  to  be  extremely  low,  notably  considering  the  age  of
patients eligible  for  screening  [85].  Furthermore,  the  reduction
in  overall  mortality  observed  in  the  NLST  suggests  an  absence  of
207S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
signiﬁcant  consequences  on  survival.  In  the  Italian  ITALUNG  trial,
in  which  3206  patients  were  randomized  to  ﬁve  years  of  annual
LDCT  screening  or  no  screening  for  lung  cancer,  the  mean,  cumu-
lated,  individual  irradiation  dose  in  the  patients  concerned  by  it
ranged  from  6.2  to  6.8  mSv.  The  screening  CT  themselves  were
responsible  for  77%  of  that  exposure  and  complementary  examina-
tions  for  the  remaining  23%  [86].  Some  authors  have  underlined  the
deleterious  effects  of  overstating  the  risks  of  radiation  to  patients,
including  that  of  premature  mortality  caused  by  the  non-detection
of  serious  pathologies,  whereas  any  theoretical  risk  caused  by  irra-
diation  would  appear  many  years  after  the  examination,  if  at  all
[87].  However,  the  advent  of  ultra-low  dose  scanners  that  will  pro-
vide  comparable  nodule-detection  capacities  for  a  radiation  dose
(0.25  mSv)  close  to  that  of  a  chest  X-ray  will  probably  change  the
game  in  the  future  [50–52] .
Finally,  the  issue  of  smoking  cessation  must  be  discussed  with
screening  candidates  and  the  degree  of  nicotine  dependency  eval-
uated  for them. The  participants  in  the  ACRIN  arm  of  the  NLST  had
provided  particularly  high  amounts  of  smoking  data.  A  recent  study
focusing on those  NLST  participants  [88]  conﬁrmed  increased  rates
of  lung  cancer  and  speciﬁc  and  all-cause  mortality  in  patients  with
higher vs. lower  dependency  scores.  Cessation  is  thus  a  major  issue.
The  NLST  counted  24,190  current  and  26,073  former  smokers.  The
control group’s former  smokers  who  had  seven  years  of  abstinence
showed  20%  less  lung  cancer-speciﬁc  mortality  (i.e.,  a  reduction
equivalent  to  that  obtained  by  the  LDCT  screening  program).  The
experimental  group’s  (i.e.,  those  who  received  LDCT  screening)  for-
mer  smokers  abstinent  for  seven  years  did  even  better  with  a  30%
reduction  in  that  same  endpoint.  However,  the  best  result,  −38%
in  speciﬁc  mortality,  was  obtained  in  patients  who  were  abstinent
for  15  years  and  in  the  experimental  group  [89].  Participation  in  a
screening  program  can  however  contribute  to  cessation.  The  NLST
observed  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  active  smokers  each  year,
and  that  reduction  was  stronger  in  patients  for  whom  screening
results  were  positive  with  features  highly  suggestive  of  cancer  [90].
The  patients  who  quit  smoking  in  these  conditions  appeared  to  do
so  durably.  For  all  of  the  above  reasons,  smoking  cessation  assis-
tance  must  be  systematically  proposed  to  all  patients  undergoing
LDCT  for  lung  cancer  screening.  The  work  group  recommends  that
information on  smoking  cessation  be  provided  in  both  oral  and
written  forms  (Appendix  1).
#17 Precise  information  on  the  beneﬁts  of  screening,  the  pos-
sible  risks  of  screening  (including  overdiagnosis),  and  tobacco
cessation  must  be  provided  to  patients  before  they  partici-
pate in  an  individual  LDCT  screening  program  for  lung  cancer
(grade AE).
12. Conclusion
Although  the  effectiveness  of  LDCT  for  lung  cancer  screening  has
been  clearly  demonstrated,  its  optimization  remains  dependent  on
the  clariﬁcation  of  numerous  points.  In  the  opinion  of  the  work
group,  there  are  three  topics  that  merit  prioritized  investigation.
The  ﬁrst  topic  is  favoring  the  adherence  of  the  eligible  population
to  the  screening  program  in  its  entirety,  including  smoking  cessa-
tion.  The  second  topic  is  optimizing  eligible  population  selection
and  identifying  patients  eligible  for  but  not  receiving  screening.
For  these  two  points,  pooled  subgroups  analysis  may  be  helpful.
The  third  topic  is  intensifying  the  study  of  radiomics  (with  arti-
ﬁcial  intelligence  [91,92]  and  biomarkers)  in  the  setting  of  lung
cancer screening  and  the  contributions  they  may  make  to  it.  Finally,
cost–risk–beneﬁts  analysis,  adapted  to  each  healthcare  system,  arealso  essentials.  Thus,  the  experts  renew  their  recommendation  in
favor  of  individual  screening  for  lung  cancer  in  France  as  per  the
conditions  laid  out  in  this  document  (grade  A);  and  recommend  the
very  rapid  organization  and  funding  of  prospective  studies,  which,
if  conclusive,  will  enable  the  deployment  of  lung  cancer  screening
organized  at  the  national  level  (grade  AE).
Contributors
Prof.  Fabrice  Barlesi  (Marseille,  France).
Dr.  Sébastien  Bommart  (Montpellier,  France).
Dr.  Pierre-Yves  Brillet  (Paris,  France).
Dr.  Olivier  Castelnau  (St  Laurent  du  Var).
Prof.  Pierre-Emmanuel  Falcoz  (Strasbourg,  France).
Dr.  Mathieu  Lederlin  (Rennes,  France).
Dr.  Franck  Leduff  (Ajaccio,  France).
Prof.  Etienne  Lemarié  (Tours,  France).
Dr.  Alain  Makinson  (Montpellier,  France).
Prof.  Charles-Hugo  Marquette  (Nice,  France).
Dr.  Bertrand  Mennecier  (Strasbourg,  France).
Dr.  Michaël  Ohana  (Strasbourg,  France).
Ms. Béatrice Rulliat  (Lyon,  France).
Dr.  Anne-Marie  Ruppert  (Paris,  France).
Ms.  Suzy  Sauvajon  (Lyon,  France).
Dr.  Patricia  Soler-Michel  (Lyon,  France).
Dr.  Jean  Trédaniel  (Paris,  France).
Fundings
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Intergroupe  francophone  de
cancérologie  thoracique,  which  provided  unrestricted  grant  for
meeting organization  and  manuscript  edition.
Author  contributions
All  authors  attest  that  they  meet  the  current  International  Com-
mittee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  (ICMJE)  criteria  for  Authorship.
Credit  author  statement
Sébastien  Couraud  MD,  PhD,  Bernard  Milleron  MD,  Arnaud
Scherpereel  MD,  PhD,  Antoine  Khalil  MD,  PhD:  conceptualization,
writing  original  draft  preparation.
Gilbert  Ferretti  MD,  PhD,  Valérie  Gounant  MD,  Olivier  Leleu  MD,
Elisabeth  Quoix  MD,  PhD,  Virginie  Westeel  MD,  PhD,  Gérard  Zal-
cman  MD,  PhD:  writing  original  draft  preparation.
Alexis  Cortot  MD,  PhD,  Nicolas  Girard  MD,  PhD,  Franc ¸  ois  Lau-
rent  MD,  PhD,  Marie-Pierre  Revel  MD,  PhD,  Marie  Wislez  MD,  PhD:
writing  –  reviewing  and  editing.
Acknowledgements
The authors  would  thanks  M.  Kevin  Erwin,  for  professional
English  translation.
Disclosure  of  interest
Dr.  Couraud  reports  grants  from  Amgen,  grants,  personal  fees
and other from Astra-Zeneca,  grants,  personal  fees  and  other  from
BMS,  grants, personal  fees  and  other  from  Boehringer  Ingelheim,
grants, personal fees  and  other  from  Chugai,  non-ﬁnancial  sup-
port  from  ID  Solution,  grants  and  personal  fees  from  Laidet,  grants
and  personal  fees  from  Lilly,  grants  and  personal  fees  from  MSD,
grants from  Pﬁzer,  grants,  personal  fees  and  other  from  Roche,  non-
ﬁnancial  support  from  Sophia  Genetics,  non-ﬁnancial  support  from
208S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
Sysmex  Inostics,  grants,  personal  fees  and  other  from  Takeda,  other
from  Vitalaire,  grants  from  Bayer,  outside  the  submitted  work.
Dr.  Ferretti  reports  personal  fees  from  Roche  SAS,  personal  fees
from  Boehringer,  personal  fees  from  General  Electric  medical  care,
personal  fees  from  BMS,  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Guerbet,  per-
sonal  fees  from  Astra-Zeneca,  personal  fees  from  MSD,  outside  the
submitted  work.
Dr.  Cortot  reports  personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from
Astra-Zeneca,  grants,  personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from
Bohringer-Ingelheim,  personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from
BMS,  personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  MSD,  grants,
personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Novartis,  grants  from
Merck,  personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Pﬁzer,  grants,
personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Roche,  personal  fees
and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Takeda,  during  the  conduct  of  the
study.
Dr. Girard  reports  personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from
BMS,  personal fees and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  MSD,  grants,
personal  fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Roche,  grants,  per-
sonal fees and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Astra-Zeneca,  personal
fees  and  non-ﬁnancial  support  from  Pﬁzer,  personal  fees  and  non-
ﬁnancial support from  Novartis,  outside  the  submitted  work.
Dr.  Gounant  reports  personal  fees  from  Astra-Zeneca,  personal
fees from BMS,  personal  fees  from  MSD,  personal  fees  from  Pﬁzer,
personal  fees  from  Takeda,  personal  fees  from  Roche,  personal  fees
from  Boehringer,  outside  the  submitted  work.
Dr.  Leleu  reports  personal  fees  from  Astra-Zeneca,  personal  fees
from  Roche,  outside  the  submitted  work.
Dr.  Quoix  reports  personal  fees  and  other  from  BMS,  other  from
Roche,  other  from  Takeda,  personal  fees  from  Novartis,  outside  the
submitted  work.
Dr.  Westeel  reports  personal  fees  and  other  from  Roche,  per-
sonal  fees  and  other  from  BMS,  personal  fees  and  other  from
Astra-Zeneca,  personal  fees  from  MSD,  personal  fees  from  Takeda,
other  from  Pﬁzer,  personal  fees  and  other  from  Boehringer  Ingel-
heim,  personal  fees  from  Lilly,  outside  the  submitted  work.
Dr.  Zalcman  reports  personal  fees,  non-ﬁnancial  support  and
other  from  BMS,  other  from  Astra-Zeneca,  grants  and  other  from
Roche,  personal  fees  from  MSD,  outside  the  submitted  work.
The other  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  competing  interest.
Appendix  A.  Supplementary  data
Supplementary  data  associated  with  this  article  can  be  found,  in
the  online  version,  at  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diii.2021.01.012 .
References
[1]  Ferlay  J,  Colombet  M,  Soerjomataram  I,  Mathers  C,  Parkin  DM,  Pi˜neros  M,
et  al.  Estimating  the  global  cancer  incidence  and  mortality  in  2018:  GLOBOCAN
sources  and  methods.  Int  J  Cancer  2019;144:1941–53.
[2] Locher C,  Debieuvre  D,  Coëtmeur  D,  Goupil  F,  Molinier  O,  Collon  T,  et  al.  Major
changes in  lung  cancer  over  the  last  ten  years  in  France:  the  KBP-CPHG  studies.
Lung  Cancer  2013;81:32–8.
[3]  Antonia  SJ,  Borghaei  H,  Ramalingam  SS,  Horn  L,  De  Castro  Carpe ˜no  J,  Pluzan-
ski  A,  et  al.  Four-year  survival  with  nivolumab  in  patients  with  previously
treated  advanced  non-small-cell  lung  cancer:  a  pooled  analysis.  Lancet  Oncol
2019;20:1395–408.
[4] Garon  EB,  Hellmann  MD,  Rizvi  NA,  Carcereny  E,  Leighl  NB,  Ahn  M-J,  et  al.  Five-
year  overall  survival  for  patients  with  advanced  non-small-cell  lung  cancer
treated with  pembrolizumab:  results  from  the  phase  I  KEYNOTE-001  study.  J
Clin  Oncol  2019;37:2518–27.
[5]  Henschke  CI,  Yankelevitz  DF,  Libby  DM,  Pasmantier  MW,  Smith  JP,  Miettinen
OS.  Survival  of  patients  with  stage  I  lung  cancer  detected  on  CT  screening.  N
Engl J Med  2006;355:1763–71.
[6] Raz DJ,  Zell  JA,  Ou  S-HI,  Gandara  DR,  Anton-Culver  H,  Jablons  DM.  Natural  his-
tory  of  stage  I  non-small  cell  lung  cancer:  implications  for  early  detection.  Chest
2007;132:193–9.
[7]  Oken  MM,  Hocking  WG,  Kvale  PA,  Andriole  GL,  Buys  SS,  Church  TR,  et  al.
Screening  by  chest  radiograph  and  lung  cancer  mortality:  the  Prostate,  Lung,
Colorectal,  and  Ovarian  (PLCO)  randomized  trial.  JAMA  2011;306:1865–73.[8]  Infante  M,  Cavuto  S,  Lutman  FR,  Passera  E,  Chiarenza  M,  Chiesa  G,  et  al.
Long-term  follow-up  results  of  the  DANTE  Trial,  a  randomized  study  of  lung
cancer  screening  with  spiral  computed  tomography.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2015;191:1166–75.
[9]  Veronesi  G,  Bellomi  M,  Veronesi  U,  Paganelli  G,  Maisonneuve  P,  Scanagatta
P,  et  al.  Role  of  positron  emission  tomography  scanning  in  the  management
of  lung  nodules  detected  at  baseline  computed  tomography  screening.  Ann
Thorac  Surg 2007;84:959–66.
[10]  Chen  W,  Gao  X,  Tian  Q,  Chen  L.  A  comparison  of  autoﬂuorescence  bronchoscopy
and white  light  bronchoscopy in detection  of  lung  cancer  and  preneoplastic
lesions: a  meta-analysis.  Lung  Cancer  2011;73:183–8.
[11] Couraud S,  Milleron  B.  Lung cancer screening:  what  is  new  since  the  NLST
results? Curr  Pulmonol  Rep  2016;5:130–9.
[12]  Aberle  DR, Adams AM,  Berg  CD, Black WC,  Clapp  JD,  Fagerstrom  RM,  et  al.
Reduced
 lung-cancer  mortality  with  low-dose  computed  tomographic  screen-
ing. N Engl  J  Med 2011;365:395–409.
[13]  Horeweg  N,  van  der  Aalst  CM,  Vliegenthart  R,  Zhao  Y,  Xie  X,  Scholten  ET,  et  al.
Volumetric  computed  tomography screening for  lung  cancer: three rounds of
the
 NELSON  trial.  Eur  Respir  J  2013;42:1659–67.
[14] Couraud  S,  Cortot  AB,  Greillier  L,  Gounant  V,  Mennecier  B,  Girard  N,  et  al.  From
randomized  trials  to  the  clinic:  is  it  time  to  implement  individual  lung-cancer
screening  in  clinical  practice?  A  multidisciplinary  statement  from  French
experts  on  behalf  of  the  French  Intergroup  (IFCT)  and  the  Groupe  d’oncologie
de langue  franc ¸  aise  (GOLF).  Ann  Oncol  2013;24:586–97.
[15]  Girard  N,  Gounant  V,  Mennecier  B,  Greillier  L,  Cortot  AB,  Couraud  S,  et  al.  Indi-
vidual  lung  cancer  screening  in  practice.  Perspectives  on  the  propositions  from
the  multidisciplinary  group  of  the  Intergroupe  francophone  de  cancérologie
thoracique, the  Société  d’imagerie  thoracique  and  the  Groupe  d’oncologie  de
langue  franc ¸  aise.  Rev  Mal  Respir  2014;31:91–103.
[16]  de  Koning  HJ,  van  der  Aalst  CM,  de  Jong  PA,  Scholten  ET,  Nackaerts  K,  Heuvel-
mans  MA,  et  al.  Reduced  lung-cancer  mortality  with  volume  CT  screening  in  a
randomized trial. N  Engl  J  Med  2020;382:503–13.
[17]  Wille  MMW,  Dirksen  A,  Ashraf  H,  Saghir  Z,  Bach  KS,  Brodersen  J,  et  al.  Results
of  the  randomized  Danish  Lung  Cancer  Screening  Trial  with  focus  on  high-risk
proﬁling.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med  2016;193:542–51.
[18] Paci E, Puliti  D,  Lopes  Pegna  A,  Carrozzi  L,  Picozzi  G,  Falaschi  F,  et  al.  Mortality,
survival and  incidence  rates  in  the  ITALUNG  randomized  lung  cancer  screening
trial.  Thorax  2017;72:825–31.
[19]  Infante  M,  Sestini  S,  Galeone  C,  Marchianò  A,  Lutman  FR,  Angeli  E,  et  al.  Lung
cancer screening with  low-dose  spiral  computed  tomography:  evidence  from
a pooled  analysis  of  two  Italian  randomized  trials.  Eur  J  Cancer  2017;26:324–9.
[20]  Pastorino  U,  Silva  M,  Sestini  S,  Sabia  F,  Boeri  M,  Cantarutti  A,  et  al.  Prolonged
lung  cancer  screening  reduced  10-year  mortality  in  the  MILD  trial.  Ann  Oncol
2019;30:1162–9.
[21]  Becker  N,  Motsch  E,  Trotter  A,  Heussel  CP,  Dienemann  H,  Schnabel  PA,  et  al.  Lung
cancer  mortality  reduction  by  LDCT  screening  –  Results  from  the  randomized
German  LUSI  trial.  Int  J  Cancer  2019;146:1503–13.
[22] Gendarme S, Perrot É, Reskot  F,  Bhoowabul  V,  Fourre  G,  Souquet  P-J,  et  al.  Eco-
nomic
 impact  of  lung  cancer  screening  in  France:  a  modeling  study.  Rev  Mal
Respir 2017;34:717–28.
[23] Leleu  O,  Basille  D,  Auquier  M,  Clarot  C,  Hoguet  E,  Pétigny  V,  et  al.  Lung  cancer
screening by low-dose CT scan:  baseline  results  of  a  French  prospective  study.
Clin Lung  Cancer  2020;21:145–52.
[24]  van  Iersel  CA,  de  Koning  HJ,  Draisma  G,  Mali  WPTM,  Scholten  ET,  Nackaerts
K,  et  al.  Risk-based  selection  from  the  general  population  in  a  screening
trial: selection  criteria,  recruitment  and  power  for  the  Dutch–Belgian  ran-
domized  lung  cancer  multi-slice  CT  screening  trial  (NELSON).  Int  J  Cancer
2007;120:868–74.
[25]  Moyer  VA,  US  Preventive  Services  Task  Force.  Screening  for  lung  cancer:  US
Preventive Services Task  Force  recommendation  statement.  Ann  Intern  Med
2014;160:330–8.
[26]  Katki  HA,  Kovalchik  SA,  Berg  CD,  Cheung  LC,  Chaturvedi  AK.  Development  and
validation  of  risk  models  to  select  ever-smokers  for  CT  lung  cancer  screening.
JAMA  2016;315:2300–11.
[27] Gray EP,  Teare  MD,  Stevens  J,  Archer  R.  Risk  prediction  models  for  lung  cancer:
a  systematic  review.  Clin  Lung  Cancer  2016;17:95–106.
[28]  Field  JK,  Duffy  SW,  Baldwin  DR,  Whynes  DK,  Devaraj  A,  Brain  KE,  et  al.  UK
Lung  Cancer  RCT  Pilot  Screening  Trial:  baseline  ﬁndings  from  the  screening  arm
provide  evidence  for  the  potential  implementation  of  lung  cancer  screening.
Thorax 2016;71:161–70.
[29] Tammemagi  MC,  Schmidt  H,  Martel  S,  McWilliams  A,  Gofﬁn  JR,  Johnston  MR,
et  al.  Participant  selection  for  lung  cancer  screening  by  risk  modelling  (the
Pan-Canadian Early  Detection  of  Lung  Cancer  [PanCan]  study):  a  single-arm,
prospective  study.  Lancet  Oncol  2017;18:1523–31.
[30]  Carreras  G,  Gorini  G,  Paci  E.  Can  a  national  lung  cancer  screening  program  in
combination  with  smoking  cessation  policies  cause  an  early  decrease  in  tobacco
deaths in  Italy?  Cancer  Prev  Res  2012;5:874–82.
[31] Joseph AM,  Rothman  AJ,  Almirall  D,  Begnaud  A,  Chiles  C,  Cinciripini  PM,  et  al.
Lung  cancer  screening  and  smoking  cessation  clinical  trials.  SCALE  (Smoking
Cessation  within  the  Context  of  Lung  Cancer  Screening)  collaboration.  Am  J
Respir Crit Care  Med  2018;197:172–82.
[32]  Iaccarino  JM,  Duran  C,  Slatore  CG,  Wiener  RS,  Kathuria  H.  Combining  smoking
cessation interventions with  LDCT  lung  cancer  screening:  a  systematic  review.
Prev Med  2019;121:24–32.
[33]  Zeng  L,  Yu  X,  Yu  T,  Xiao  J,  Huang  Y.  Interventions  for  smoking  cessation  in  people
diagnosed with  lung  cancer.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev  2019;6:CD011751.
209S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
[34]  Henschke  CI,  Boffetta  P,  Gorlova  O,  Yip  R,  Delancey  JO,  Foy  M.  Assess-
ment  of  lung-cancer  mortality  reduction  from  CT  screening.  Lung  Cancer
2011;71:328–32.
[35] Veronesi  G,  Maisonneuve  P,  Spaggiari  L,  Rampinelli  C,  Pelosi  G,  Preda  L,  et  al.
Long-term  outcomes  of  a  pilot  CT  screening  for  lung  cancer.  Ecancermedi-
calscience  2010;4:186.
[36]  Veronesi  G,  Maisonneuve  P,  Rampinelli  C,  Bertolotti  R,  Petrella  F,  Spaggiari  L,
et  al. Computed tomography  screening  for  lung  cancer:  results  of  ten  years
of annual  screening  and  validation  of  cosmos  prediction  model.  Lung  Cancer
2013;82:426–30.
[37]  Yousaf-Khan  U,  van  der  Aalst  C,  de  Jong  PA,  Heuvelmans  M,  Scholten  E,  Lammers
J-W, et al.  Final  screening  round of the  NELSON  lung  cancer  screening  trial:  the
effect of  a  2.5-year  screening  interval.  Thorax  2017;72:48–56.
[38]  Pastorino  U, Rossi M,  Rosato  V, Marchianò A,  Sverzellati  N,  Morosi  C,  et  al.
Annual
 or  biennial  CT  screening  versus  observation  in  heavy  smokers:  5-year
results of the  MILD  trial. Eur J Cancer 2012;21:308–15.
[39]  Sverzellati  N,  Silva  M,  Calareso  G,  Galeone  C,  Marchianò  A,  Sestini  S,  et  al.
Low-dose  computed  tomography for lung  cancer  screening: comparison of
performance
 between  annual  and  biennial  screen.  Eur  Radiol  2016;26:3821–9.
[40] Humphrey  LL,  Deffebach  M,  Pappas  M,  Baumann  C,  Artis  K,  Mitchell  JP,  et  al.
Screening  for  lung  cancer  with  low-dose  computed  tomography:  a  systematic
review  to  update  the  US  Preventive  services  task  force  recommendation.  Ann
Intern  Med  2013;159:411–20.
[41] Horeweg  N,  van  der  Aalst  C,  Thunnissen  E,  Nackaerts  K,  Weenink  C,  Groen  HJM,
et  al.  Participants’  results  of  three  rounds  of  the  randomized  Dutch–Belgian
Lung  Cancer  Screening  Trial:  a  volumetry-based  computer  tomography  screen-
ing  strategy.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med  2013;187:A2344.
[42] de  Koning  HJ,  Meza  R,  Plevritis  SK,  ten  Haaf  K,  Munshi  VN,  Jeon  J,  et  al.  Beneﬁts
and  harms  of  computed  tomography  lung  cancer  screening  strategies:  a  com-
parative  modeling  study  for  the  US  Preventive  Services  Task  Force.  Ann  Intern
Med  2014;160:311–20.
[43] de Koning  HJ,  Meza  R,  Plevritis  SK.  Raising  the  bar  for  the  US  Preventive  Services
Task  Force.  Ann  Intern  Med  2014;161:532–3.
[44] Ten  Haaf  K,  van  Rosmalen  J,  de  Koning  HJ.  Lung  cancer  detectability  by  test,  his-
tology,  stage,  and  gender:  estimates  from  the  NLST  and  the  PLCO  trials.  Cancer
Epidemiol Biomark Prev 2015;24:154–61.
[45]  Tammemägi  MC,  Ten  Haaf  K,  Toumazis  I,  Kong  CY,  Han  SS,  Jeon  J,  et  al.  Devel-
opment  and  validation  of  a  multivariable  lung  cancer  risk  prediction  model
that  includes  low-dose  computed  tomography  screening  results:  a  secondary
analysis of data  from  the  National  Lung  Screening  Trial.  JAMA  Netw  Open
2019;2:e190204.
[46]  Patz  EF,  Greco  E,  Gatsonis  C,  Pinsky  P,  Kramer  BS,  Aberle  DR.  Lung  cancer
incidence  and  mortality  in  National  Lung  Screening  Trial  participants  who
underwent low-dose CT prevalence  screening:  a  retrospective  cohort  anal-
ysis  of a  randomised,  multicentre,  diagnostic  screening  trial.  Lancet  Oncol
2016;17:590–9.
[47]  Horeweg  N,  Scholten  ET,  de  Jong  PA,  van  der  Aalst  CM,  Weenink  C,  Lammers  J-
WJ, et al. Detection  of  lung  cancer  through  low-dose  CT  screening  (NELSON):  a
prespeciﬁed  analysis of  screening  test  performance  and  interval  cancers.  Lancet
Oncol  2014;15:1342–50.
[48]  Xu  DM,  Gietema  H,  de  Koning  H,  Vernhout  R,  Nackaerts  K,  Prokop  M,  et  al.  Nod-
ule management protocol  of  the  NELSON  randomised  lung  cancer  screening
trial.  Lung  Cancer  2006;54:177–84.
[49]  MacMahon  H,  Naidich  DP,  Goo  JM,  Lee  KS,  Leung  ANC,  Mayo  JR,  et  al.  Guidelines
for management  of  incidental  pulmonary  nodules  detected  on  CT  images:  from
the  Fleischner  Society  2017.  Radiology  2017;284:228–43.
[50] Kazerooni  EA,  Armstrong  MR,  Amorosa  JK,  Hernandez  D,  Liebscher  LA,  Nath
H,  et  al.  ACR  CT  accreditation  program  and  the  lung  cancer  screening  program
designation. J  Am  Coll  Radiol  2016;13:R30–4.
[51] Beregi JP,  Grefﬁer  J.  Low  and  ultra-low  dose  radiation  in  CT:  opportunities  and
limitations.  Diagn  Interv  Imaging  2019;100:63–4.
[52] Ludes  C,  Labani  A,  Severac  F,  Jeung  MY,  Leyendecker  P,  Roy  C,  et  al.  Ultra-low-
dose  unenhanced  chest  CT:  prospective  comparison  of  high  kV/low  mA  versus
low kV/high  mA  protocols.  Diagn  Interv  Imaging  2019;100:85–93.
[53]  Jankowski  A,  Martinelli  T,  Timsit  JF,  Brambilla  C,  Thony  F,  Coulomb  M,
et  al.  Pulmonary  nodule  detection  on  MDCT  images:  evaluation  of  diagnos-
tic  performance  using  thin  axial  images,  maximum  intensity  projections,  and
computer-assisted detection. Eur  Radiol  2007;17:3148–56.
[54] Rubin  GD,  Lyo  JK,  Paik  DS,  Sherbondy  AJ,  Chow  LC,  Leung  AN,  et  al.  Pulmonary
nodules  on  multi-detector  row  CT  scans:  performance  comparison  of  radiolo-
gists  and  computer-aided  detection.  Radiology  2005;234:274–83.
[55] Zhao Y,  de  Bock  GH,  Vliegenthart  R,  van  Klaveren  RJ,  Wang  Y,  Bogoni  L,
et al.  Performance  of  computer-aided  detection  of  pulmonary  nodules  in
low-dose  CT:  comparison  with  double  reading  by  nodule  volume.  Eur  Radiol
2012;22:2076–84.
[56]  Christe  A,  Leidolt  L,  Huber  A,  Steiger  P,  Szucs-Farkas  Z,  Roos  JE,  et  al.  Lung  cancer
screening with  CT:  evaluation  of  radiologists  and  different  computer-assisted
detection  software  (CAD)  as  ﬁrst  and  second  readers  for  lung  nodule  detection
at  different  dose  levels.  Eur  J  Radiol  2013;82:e873–8.
[57]  Godoy  MCB,  Kim  TJ,  White  CS,  Bogoni  L,  de  Groot  P,  Florin  C,  et  al.  Beneﬁt  of
computer-aided  detection  analysis  for  the  detection  of  subsolid  and  solid  lung
nodules  on  thin-  and  thick-section  CT.  Am  J  Roentgenol  2013;200:74–83.
[58] Murphy  A,  Skalski  M,  Gaillard  F.  The  utilisation  of  convolutional  neu-
ral  networks  in  detecting  pulmonary  nodules:  a  review.  Br  J  Radiol
2018;91:20180028.[59]  Oudkerk  M,  Devaraj  A,  Vliegenthart  R,  Henzler  T,  Prosch  H,  Heussel  CP,
et  al.  European  position  statement  on  lung  cancer  screening.  Lancet  Oncol
2017;18:e754–66.
[60] Bankier  AA,  MacMahon  H,  Goo  JM,  Rubin  GD,  Schaefer-Prokop  CM,  Naidich  DP.
Recommendations  for  measuring  pulmonary  nodules  at  CT:  a  statement  from
the  Fleischner  Society.  Radiology  2017;285:584–600.
[61]  Vlahos  I,  Stefanidis  K,  Sheard  S,  Nair  A,  Sayer  C,  Moser  J.  Lung  cancer
screening:  nodule identiﬁcation and  characterization.  Transl  Lung  Cancer  Res
2018;7:288–303.
[62]  Naidich  DP,  Bankier AA, MacMahon  H,  Schaefer-Prokop  CM,  Pistolesi  M,  Goo
JM, et  al.  Recommendations  for  the  management  of  subsolid  pulmonary
nodules detected at  CT:  a  statement from the  Fleischner  Society.  Radiology
2013;266:304–17.
[63]  Walter  JE, Heuvelmans MA,  de  Jong PA, Vliegenthart  R,  van  Ooijen  PMA,  Peters
RB,
 et  al.  Occurrence  and  lung  cancer  probability  of  new  solid  nodules  at  inci-
dence screening with  low-dose  CT: analysis of data from  the  randomised,
controlled
 NELSON  trial.  Lancet  Oncol  2016;17:907–16.
[64]  Walter  JE, Heuvelmans MA,  Ten  Haaf K, Vliegenthart R, van  der  Aalst  CM,
Yousaf-Khan
 U,  et  al.  Persisting  new  nodules  in  incidence  rounds  of  the  NELSON
CT lung  cancer  screening  study.  Thorax  2019;74:247–53.
[65]  Horeweg  N,  van  Rosmalen  J,  Heuvelmans  MA,  van  der  Aalst  CM,  Vliegenthart
R,  Scholten  ET,  et  al.  Lung  cancer  probability  in  patients  with  CT-detected
pulmonary  nodules:  a  prespeciﬁed  analysis  of  data  from  the  NELSON  trial  of
low-dose CT  screening.  Lancet  Oncol  2014;15:1332–41.
[66]  Kauczor  H-U,  Baird  A-M,  Blum  TG,  Bonomo  L,  Bostantzoglou  C,  Burghuber
O,  et  al.  ESR/ERS  statement  paper  on  lung  cancer  screening.  Eur  Respir  J
2020;55:1900506.
[67] Tanoue  LT,  Tanner  NT,  Gould  MK,  Silvestri  GA.  Lung  cancer  screening.  Am  J
Respir  Crit  Care  Med  2015;191:19–33.
[68]  Godoy  MCB,  Naidich  DP.  Subsolid  pulmonary  nodules  and  the  spectrum  of
peripheral  adenocarcinomas  of  the  lung:  recommended  interim  guidelines  for
assessment and management.  Radiology  2009;253:606–22.
[69]  Couraud  S,  Greillier  L,  Milleron  B,  IFCT  Lung  Cancer  Screening  Group.  Estimating
overdiagnosis  in  lung  cancer  screening.  JAMA  Intern  Med  2014;174:1197.
[70]  Black  WC,  Chiles  C,  Church  TR,  Gareen  IF,  Gierada  DS,  Mahon  I,  et  al.  Lung
cancer incidence and mortality  with  extended  follow-up  in  the  national  lung
screening trial  national  lung  screening  trial  writing  team.  J  Thorac  Oncol  ,
2019;14:1732–42.
[71]  Callister  MEJ,  Baldwin  DR,  Akram  AR,  Barnard  S,  Cane  P,  Draffan  J,  et  al.  British
Thoracic Society guidelines  for  the  investigation  and  management  of  pul-
monary nodules.  Thorax  2015;70(Suppl.  2):ii1–54.
[72]  Taghizadeh  N,  Tremblay  A,  Cressman  S,  Peacock  S,  McWilliams  AM,  MacEachern
P,  et  al.  Health-related  quality  of  life  and  anxiety  in  the  PAN-CAN  lung  cancer
screening cohort. BMJ Open  2019;9:e024719.
[73] Brain K,  Lifford  KJ,  Carter  B,  Burke  O,  McRonald  F,  Devaraj  A,  et  al.  Long-term
psychosocial  outcomes  of  low-dose  CT  screening:  results  of  the  UK  Lung  Cancer
Screening  randomised  controlled  trial.  Thorax  2016;71:996–1005.
[74] Freiman MR, Clark  JA,  Slatore  CG,  Gould  MK,  Woloshin  S,  Schwartz  LM,  et  al.
Patients’  knowledge, beliefs,  and  distress  associated  with  detection  and  eval-
uation  of  incidental  pulmonary  nodules  for  cancer:  results  from  a  multicenter
survey.  J  Thorac  Oncol  2016;11(5):700–8.
[75] Rasmussen JF,  Siersma  V,  Pedersen  JH,  Brodersen  J.  Psychosocial  consequences
in  the  Danish  randomised  controlled  lung  cancer  screening  trial  (DLCST).  Lung
Cancer  2015;87:65–72.
[76]  Slatore  CG,  Sullivan  DR,  Pappas  M,  Humphrey  LL.  Patient-centered  outcomes
among  lung  cancer  screening  recipients  with  computed  tomography:  a  sys-
tematic  review.  J  Thorac  Oncol  2014;9:927–34.
[77]  Gareen  IF,  Duan  F,  Greco  EM,  Snyder  BS,  Boiselle  PM,  Park  ER,  et  al.  Impact
of  lung  cancer  screening  results  on  participant  health-related  quality  of  life
and  state  anxiety  in  the  National  Lung  Screening  Trial.  Cancer  2014;120:
3401–9.
[78] Kanashiki  M,  Tomizawa  T,  Yamaguchi  I,  Kurishima  K,  Hizawa  N,  Ishikawa  H,
et al.  Volume  doubling  time  of  lung  cancers  detected  in  a  chest  radiograph  mass
screening program: comparison  with  CT  screening.  Oncol  Lett  2012;4:513–6.
[79] Veronesi  G,  Maisonneuve  P,  Bellomi  M,  Rampinelli  C,  Durli  I,  Bertolotti  R,  et  al.
Estimating  overdiagnosis  in  low-dose  computed  tomography  screening  for
lung  cancer:  a  cohort  study.  Ann  Intern  Med  2012;157:776–84.
[80] Patz EF, Pinsky  P,  Gatsonis  C,  Sicks  JD,  Kramer  BS,  Tammemägi  MC,  et  al.  Over-
diagnosis in  low-dose  computed  tomography  screening  for  lung  cancer.  JAMA
Intern Med  2014;174:269–74.
[81]  Heleno  B,  Siersma  V,  Brodersen  J.  Estimation  of  overdiagnosis  of  lung  cancer  in
low-dose  computed  tomography  screening:  a  secondary  analysis  of  the  Danish
Lung  Cancer  Screening  Trial.  JAMA  Intern  Med  2018;178:1420–2.
[82] Infante  M,  Berghmans  T,  Heuvelmans  MA,  Hillerdal  G,  Oudkerk  M.  Slow-
growing  lung  cancer  as  an  emerging  entity:  from  screening  to  clinical
management.  Eur  Respir  J  2013;42:1706–22.
[83] Scholten ET,  de  Jong  PA,  de  Hoop  B,  van  Klaveren  R,  van  Amelsvoort-van  de
Vorst  S,  Oudkerk  M,  et  al.  Towards  a  close  computed  tomography  monitor-
ing  approach  for  screen  detected  subsolid  pulmonary  nodules?  Eur  Respir  J
2015;45:765–73.
[84]  Walter  JE,  Heuvelmans  MA,  Yousaf-Khan  U,  Dorrius  MD,  Thunnissen  E,  Scher-
mann  A,  et  al.  New  subsolid  pulmonary  nodules  in  lung  cancer  screening:  the
NELSON Trial.  J  Thorac  Oncol  2018;13:1410–4.
[85]  Brenner  DJ,  Hall  EJ.  Computed  tomography:  an  increasing  source  of  radiation
exposure. N  Engl  J  Med  2007;357:2277–84.
210S.  Couraud,  G.  Ferretti,  B.  Milleron  et  al.  Diagnostic  and  Interventional  Imaging  102  (2021)  199–211
[86]  Mascalchi  M,  Mazzoni  LN,  Falchini  M,  Belli  G,  Picozzi  G,  Merlini  V,  et  al.  Dose
exposure  in  the  ITALUNG  trial  of  lung  cancer  screening  with  low-dose  CT.  Br  J
Radiol  2012;85:1134–9.
[87] Brody  AS,  Guillerman  RP.  Don’t  let  radiation  scare  trump  patient  care:  10  ways
you  can  harm  your  patients  by  fear  of  radiation-induced  cancer  from  diagnostic
imaging.  Thorax  2014;69:782–4.
[88]  Rojewski  AM,  Tanner  NT,  Dai  L,  Ravenel  JG,  Gebregziabher  M,  Silvestri  GA,
et  al. Tobacco dependence  predicts  higher  lung  cancer  and  mortality  rates  and
lower rates  of  smoking  cessation  in  the  National  Lung  Screening  Trial.  Chest
2018;154:110–8.
[89]  Tanner  NT,  Kanodra  NM,  Gebregziabher  M,  Payne  E,  Halbert  CH,  Warren  GW,
et al. The  association  between  smoking abstinence and  mortality  in  the  National
Lung Screening  Trial.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med  2016;193(5):534–41.[90]  Tammemagi  MC,  Berg  CD,  Riley  TL,  Cunningham  CR,  Taylor  KL.  Impact
of  lung  cancer  screening  results  on  smoking  cessation.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst
2014;106:dju084.
[91] SFR-IA  Group,  CERF,  French  Radiology  Community.  Artiﬁcial  intelligence  and
medical  imaging  2018:  French  Radiology  Community  white  paper.  Diagn  Interv
Imaging  2018;99:727–42.
[92]  Waymel  Q,  Badr  S,  Demondion  X,  Cotten  A,  Jacques  T.  Impact  of  the  rise  of
artiﬁcial  intelligence in radiology:  what  do  radiologists  think?  Diagn  Interv
Imaging 2019;100:327–36.
211

Cancer Informa tion in French
Les informations suivantes de l’American Cancer Society sont disponibles en français, avec leur traduction en anglais. V ous pouvez télécharger
gratuitement ces documents PDF et les imprimer pour les partager avec vos patients ou vos proches.
Ces informations sont destinées aux personnes vivant aux États-Unis, dont la langue principale peut être autre que l'anglais. Les facteurs de risque
de cancer , les tests de dépistage et les traitements peuvent varier d’un pays à l’autre.
The following American Cancer Society information is available in French, along with their English translations. These PDFs are free to download and
print to share with your patients, family , or loved ones. 
This information is intended for people living in the United States who may have a primary language other than English. Cancer risk factors,
screening tests, and treatments can vary from country to country . Informa tions sur le cancer en français
Détecter le cancer à un stade précoce (tests de dépistage) | Find cancer early (screening tests)
Passez vos tests !
(English: Get Your Tests! )
Vous pouvez prévenir le cancer du col de l’utérus
(English: You Can Prevent Cervical Cancer )
Vous pouvez réduire le risque de cancer colorectal.
(English: You Can Help Prevent Colorectal Cancer )
7 choses à savoir concernant la mammographie
(English: 7 Things to Know about Getting a Mammogram )
Analyses et interventions utilisées pour détecter et traiter le cancer de la peau
(English: Tests and Procedures to Find and Treat Skin Cancer )
Examiner votre peau pour détecter tout signe de cancer
(English: Checking Your Skin for Signs of Cancer )
Des poumons sains pour tous
(English: Finding Lung Cancer Early )
Le dépistage du cancer de la prostate peut-il vous être bénéfique ?
(English: Can Prostate Cancer Testing Benefit You?)
7 choses à savoir concernant la coloscopie
(English: 7 Things to Know About Getting a Colonoscopy )
Cookie Policy
This website uses cookies and related technology that help the website function and that help us understand how you interact with it. You can manage
these settings using the Data Sharing Settings link. Privacy PolicyData Sharing Settings
Reject All Cookies
Accept All Cookies5/16/25, 2:23 PM Informations sur le cancer en français | Cancer Information in French | American Cancer Society
https://www.cancer.org/cancer-information-in-other-languages/french.html 1/5Réduire votre risque de cancer (prévention) | Lower your cancer risk (prevention)
Avis : V ous pouvez réduire votre risque de cancer .
(English: You Can Help Reduce Your Cancer Risk )
Réduire le risque de cancer en mangeant sain et en restant actif
(English: Healthy Eating and Being Active Can Lower Your Cancer Risk )
LE TABAC : Qu’est-ce que ça vous coûte?
(English: Tobacco: What is it costing you? )
Des poumons sains pour tous
(English: Healthy Lungs for Everyone )
Comment vous protéger et protéger votre famille contre le soleil
(English: How to Protect Yourself and Your Family from the Sun )
Cookie Policy
This website uses cookies and related technology that help the website function and that help us understand how you interact with it. You can manage
these settings using the Data Sharing Settings link. Privacy Policy5/16/25, 2:23 PM Informations sur le cancer en français | Cancer Information in French | American Cancer Society
https://www.cancer.org/cancer-information-in-other-languages/french.html 2/5Types de cancer | Cancer types
Après un diagnostic de cancer du sein
(English: After a Breast Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de cancer du col de l’utérus
(English: After a Cervical Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de cancer colorectal
(English: After a Colorectal Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic du poumon
(English: After a Lung Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de la prostate
(English: After a Prostate Cancer Diagnosis )
Questions sur le cancer de la peau à poser à votre équipe de soins
(English: Questions to Ask Your Health Care Team about Skin Cancer )
Vivre avec le cancer de la peau
(English: Living with Skin Cancer )
Après un diagnostic de cancer de la vessie
(English: After a Bladder Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de leucémie
(English: After a Leukemia Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de cancer du rein
(English: After a Kidney Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de lymphome
(English: After a L ymphoma Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de cancer du pancréas
(English: After a Pancreatic Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de cancer de la peau
(English: After a Skin Cancer Diagnosis )
Après un diagnostic de cancer de l’endomètre
(English: After an Endometrial Cancer Diagnosis )
Traitements | Treatments
Chirurgie du cancer
(English: Surgery for Cancer )
Radiothérapie du cancer
(English: Radiation Therapy for Cancer )
Chimiothérapie du cancer
(English: Chemotherapy for Cancer )
Immunothérapie du cancer
(English: Immunotherapy for Cancer )
Thérapie ciblée du cancer
(English: Targeted Drug Therapy for Cancer )
Hormonothérapie du cancer
(English: Hormone Therapy for Cancer )
Les biosimilaires pour le traitement du cancer
(English: Biosimilar Medicines for Cancer )Cookie Policy
This website uses cookies and related technology that help the website function and that help us understand how you interact with it. You can manage
these settings using the Data Sharing Settings link. Privacy Policy5/16/25, 2:23 PM Informations sur le cancer en français | Cancer Information in French | American Cancer Society
https://www.cancer.org/cancer-information-in-other-languages/french.html 3/5Traitements du cancer de la peau
(English: Skin Cancer Treatments )
Les essais cliniques
(English: Clinical Trials)
Effets secondaires | Side effects
Les ef fets secondaires de la radiothérapie
(English: Radiation Therapy Side Ef fects )
Que faire en cas de douleurs liées au cancer
(English: What to Do for Cancer Pain )
Que faire en cas de fatigue
(English: What to Do for Fatigue )
Que faire en cas de nausées et vomissements
(English: What to Do for Nausea and V omiting )
Que faire en cas de perte de cheveux
(English: What to Do for Hair Loss )
Que faire en cas de plaies buccales
(English: What to Do for Mouth Sores )
Que faire en cas de modifications cutanées
(English: What to Do for Skin Changes )
Que faire en cas de neuropathie périphérique
(English: What to Do for Peripheral Neuropathy )
Que faire en cas de diarrhée
(English: What to Do for Diarrhea )
Que faire en cas de détresse
(English: What to Do for Distress )
Que faire en cas de troubles du sommeil
(English: What to Do for Sleep Problems )
Que faire en cas de troubles de la mémoire, de la pensée et de la concentration
(English: What to Do for Changes in Memory , Thinking, and Focus )
Que faire en cas de modifications des ongles
(English: What to Do for Nail Changes )
Que faire en cas de faibles taux sanguins
(English: What to Do for Low Blood Counts )
Cookie Policy
This website uses cookies and related technology that help the website function and that help us understand how you interact with it. You can manage
these settings using the Data Sharing Settings link. Privacy Policy5/16/25, 2:23 PM Informations sur le cancer en français | Cancer Information in French | American Cancer Society
https://www.cancer.org/cancer-information-in-other-languages/french.html 4/5Vivre avec le cancer | Living with cancer
Qu'est-ce que le cancer?
(English: What Is Cancer? )
Parler avec votre médecin
(English: Talking With Your Doctor )
Vos analyses de laboratoire
(English: Your Lab Tests)
Biomarqueurs du cancer
(English: Cancer Biomarkers )
Assistance pour les patients, les survivants et les soignants
(English: Help for Patients, Survivors, and Caregivers )
Le rôle de soignant
(English: Being a Caregiver )
Questions à poser sur votre cancer
(English: Questions to Ask About Your Cancer )
Immunization Action Coalition  
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)  
Susan G. Komen  Other Organizations
The following organizations may provide additional information in French.
Cookie Policy
This website uses cookies and related technology that help the website function and that help us understand how you interact with it. You can manage
these settings using the Data Sharing Settings link. Privacy Policy5/16/25, 2:23 PM Informations sur le cancer en français | Cancer Information in French | American Cancer Society
https://www.cancer.org/cancer-information-in-other-languages/french.html 5/5

